Amazon Sustainability




Carbon
Methodology
    July 2025
                                 Amazon Sustainability




                                 What’s in Amazon’s 2024 Carbon Footprint?
                                 A carbon footprint measures the total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions caused by the direct
                                 and indirect activities of a company.1 These emissions are broken into three categories—
                                 Scope 1, 2, and 3 emissions. Scope 1 emissions come directly from a company’s operations,
                                 such as the fuel used by Amazon’s delivery fleet. Scope 2 emissions are indirect emissions
                                 resulting from the generation of purchased energy, like the electricity used to power Amazon
                                 facilities.2,3 Scope 3 emissions include activities that take place beyond a company’s
                                 operational boundary, for example, the production of Amazon devices such as the Kindle, or
                                 purchase of packaging materials used in our fulfillment operations.

1. Amazon calculates and         To calculate Amazon's carbon footprint, we use the operational control approach to account
   reports their carbon
   footprint in accordance       for a diverse set of direct and indirect emissions that occur upstream of, within, and
   with “The Greenhouse Gas      downstream of our operations. Our boundary includes the following emission sources:
   Protocol: A Corporate
   Accounting and Reporting
   Standard (Revised             • Amazon’s last mile delivery fleet
   Edition)” including the
   “GHG Protocol Scope 2
   Guidance (An amendment
   to the GHG Protocol
                                 • Amazon-operated freight, including trucks and airplanes
   Corporate Standard)” and
   “Technical Guidance for
   Calculating Scope 3
                                 • Purchased delivery services (e.g., postal services) and other contracted freight
   Emissions (Supplement to
   the Corporate Value Chain
   (Scope 3) Accounting and
                                 • Energy, and refrigerants for cooling used in our operations such as data centers, fulfillment
   Reporting Standard)”,           facilities, retail stores, and corporate offices
   published by the World
   Resources Institute (WRI)
   and the World Business        • Amazon-provided packaging used in our fulfillment operations
   Council for Sustainable
   Development (WBCSD).
   We refer to this              • Amazon-branded product manufacturing, such as Echo devices, Kindle e-readers, Amazon
   collectively, as the GHG
   Protocol (GHGp).                Basics, Whole Foods Market brands, and other Amazon Private Brands products
2. Amazon reports emissions
   according to GHGp’s
   market-based method           • Goods and services that enable our operations such as business travel, office supplies,
   (MBM) in both Scope 2
   and Scope 3 (as
                                   corporate events, outside consulting services, and other expenditures
   applicable) which
   accounts for renewable
   energy Amazon purchases
                                 • Capital goods, such as emissions from building construction, vehicles, and manufacturing
   to support its operations.      of servers and equipment
3. These indirect emissions
   come from electricity
   consumed by Amazon’s          • Employee commuting
   global facilities under
   Amazon’s operational
   control (e.g., owned,         • Customers’ trips to Amazon’s physical stores
   leased, and co-located
   Amazon Web Services
   (AWS) data center             • Our customers’ use of Amazon devices
   infrastructure, fulfillment
   center and delivery
   network buildings, on-site    • Amazon devices end-of-life treatment
   electric vehicle charging,
   corporate offices,
   customer service centers,     We evaluate the quantity of GHG emitted for each of these activities by taking the amount of
   physical stores, and
   financially-integrated        the activity conducted (e.g., miles traveled, or gallons of fuel burned) multiplied by its
   subsidiaries (e.g., Whole
   Foods Market)).
                                 emissions factor (e.g., grams carbon dioxide equivalent4 (CO2e) per kilowatt-hour (kWh) of
4. GHG emissions are             electricity used), which provides a representative value for the CO2e associated with that
    converted into the
    standard unit of CO₂e via
                                 activity. Once the emissions for our activities are calculated, we sum them to produce the
    Global Warming               carbon footprint for Amazon’s business, spanning our physical and online retail businesses,
    Potentials (GWPs). For
    example, one kilogram of
                                 cloud computing, device manufacturing, and beyond.
    methane has a GWP of
    28, meaning that those
    methane emissions are
                                 Our approach to quantifying our carbon footprint reflects the complexity of our business by
    equivalent to 28             combining both operational and financial records from Amazon operations around the world.
    kilograms of carbon
    dioxide (CO₂). This          We first estimate our carbon emissions for all activities within our boundary using a spend-
    conversion reflects the      based environmental assessment model, then enhance the accuracy with process-based
    fact that methane traps
    heat 28 times more
    effectively than CO₂ over
    a 100-year time horizon.     Carbon Methodology                                                                                2
                               Amazon Sustainability



                               calculations or lifecycle assessment (LCA) models, when applicable. Each year, we work to
                               continuously improve our estimates and assumptions used for emission calculations.

                               This carbon footprinting approach consists of these scientific measurements:

                               • Financial: We combine data on Amazon’s spending with industry-average, spend-based
                                 emissions factors (e.g., a standard amount of CO2e emissions associated with every dollar
                                 of spending on a particular activity). We use this model to reflect carbon emissions from
                                 activities, equipment used in our warehouses, and purchased goods and services such as
                                 office supplies and advertising services.

                               • Transportation: We track the emissions resulting from shipping products and equipment
                                 to Amazon warehouses and facilities, between warehouses, and outbound to our
                                 customers’ homes, Amazon lockers, and other pickup points. This includes estimated
                                 emissions from customers’ trips to physical stores.

                               • Refrigerants: We include the emissions that occur across our global operations from the
                                 cooling and refrigeration occurring within our facilities.

                               • Energy: We account for the impacts of the purchased electricity, back-up power
                                 generation, and heating used in our offices and facilities, as well as the carbon free
                                 electricity generated from our project commitments around the world.

                               • Packaging: We measure the materials and processes behind all the boxes, mailers, and
                                 other packing items Amazon uses in our fulfillment operations.

                               • Amazon Devices: We developed a specialized carbon footprint model to address the
                                 complexity of the manufacturing, use, and end-of-life of Amazon devices, including Echo
                                 devices, Kindle e-readers, Fire Tablet, Fire TV, Ring, and Blink. This starts at the component
                                 level—including where components are sourced and how they are manufactured into
                                 products—and extends to customers’ use of the product and the eventual product end-of-
                                 life.

                               • Amazon Products and Supplier Provider Emissions: We utilize LCAs, and supplier
                                 provided data to calculate emissions across our supply chain. This approach is used for our
                                 sold products, and for materials and equipment used across our operations.

                               • Amazon Buildings: We use building design models to calculate the emissions associated
                                 with the construction of Amazon facilities. Source data comes from material, equipment,
                                 and procurement inventories; as well as internally and externally developed, and supplier-
                                 provided LCAs.

                               • Business Travel: We incorporate third party calculated emissions based on trip level
                                 information for air, rail and car business travel.

                               • Employee Commuting: We estimate emissions associated with our employees’ transit
                                 between their homes and worksites using survey results on how our employees regularly
                                 come to work (car, bus, walking, biking, shuttle, etc.) and the distance they travel.

                               Our team uses these approaches to transform activity and spend data into emissions
                               measurements for Amazon’s specific business activities (e.g., shipping, packaging). We then
                               compile the outputs of these calculations to assemble a company-wide carbon footprint.

5.   WRI and WBCSD’s GHGp
                               Our carbon footprint meets the widely adopted international standard of the GHG Protocol
     delineates what actions   (GHGp).5 Scope 1 and Scope 2 were independently assured by Ernst & Young LLP, and Scope 3
     fall within scope for
     international standards
     for corporate
     footprinting.
                               Carbon Methodology                                                                                 3
                                Amazon Sustainability



                                was independently verified by Apex Companies, LLC.

                                As measurement techniques evolve, we adapt the way we measure and report our footprint,
                                including the recalculation of prior year(s) data to enable consistent comparison over time.
                                This may occur, for example, when we refine a calculation methodology, add new activity data
                                as it becomes available or when we improve the way we collect data from our existing
                                sources. When the change is significant, we apply the current year’s models, calculation
                                methods, emission factors, and company structure to prior year(s) data to calculate the
                                comparable total carbon emissions.

                                The following sections elaborate on the science and data behind each of the emissions
                                models we’ve developed to measure Amazon’s carbon footprint.

                                Financial Emissions Model

                                Using the Economic Input-Output Life Cycle Assessment (EIO LCA) method, our spend-based
                                model combines expenditure data from Amazon’s general ledger with industry-specific,
                                spend-based6 emissions factors published by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
                                EIO LCA emissions factors account for the “cradle-to-gate” emissions required to produce one
                                dollar of goods or services from any industry, including emissions from the extraction of raw
                                materials, energy use, supply-chain transportation, and manufacturing. This method leverages
                                economic input-output data assembled by governments to track the “recipe” of inputs
                                required to produce any good or service.7 EIO LCA accounts for the carbon emissions from
                                producing each of these intermediate inputs, and from the production of all inputs from
                                further up the supply chain.

                                We apply EIO LCA by mapping our expenditures to one or more industry sectors and
                                multiplying the appropriate emissions factors by the dollars spent. For example, spending on
                                parcel delivery by third-party carriers is mapped to the couriers and messengers sector and
                                shipping boxes are mapped to paperboard container. This method is the most efficient way to
                                tie all corporate activity into an approximated carbon footprint. Outside of Amazon, this
                                method is commonly used to estimate carbon footprints by a variety of organizations, from
                                major corporations that disclose their carbon emissions, to government entities like the U.S.
                                Department of Defense, and even individuals who wish to understand the environmental
                                impact of their personal activities.8

                                Transportation Emissions Model

                                The transportation of products to customers is an integral part of Amazon’s business. Trips
                                differ by mode, purpose, productivity, timing, and other localized variables, resulting in a
                                broad range of emissions associated with transportation activities. To account for this
6. When using the term
   “spend” in this document,
                                complexity, we use a robust modeling framework that estimates carbon emissions at the trip
   we are referring to the      level and accommodates different levels of data availability. We give priority to fuel- and
   United States Dollar
   (USD).                       distance- based calculations, but if this information is not available, we rely on a spend-based
7. Li, M.; Ingwersen, W.W.;     approach to calculate emissions. The scope of our assessment includes transport activities
   Young, B.; Vendries, J.;
   Birney, C. useeior: An       managed by Amazon and our third-party transportation providers, as well as the emissions
   Open-Source R Package        generated from customers’ trips to Amazon retail and Whole Foods Market stores.
   for Building and Using US
   Environmentally-Extended
   Input–Output Models.         Emissions Sources for Transportation
   Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 4469.
   Retrieved online:
   https://doi.org/10.3390/a    Transportation activities generate carbon emissions through the combustion of fossil fuels,
   pp12094469.
8. Henderson, A., M.            and from the supply chain activities related to vehicle fuels. The emissions model for
   Bruckner, K. Scanlon, W.
   Ingwersen. The USEEIO
                                transportation covers emissions associated these “well-to-wheels” impacts. This is both the
   framework to create IO       emissions associated with the well-to-tank (e.g., extraction, refinement, and distribution of
   models: application to the
   DoD and case
                                fuels) and tank-to-wheels emissions created from the use of transportation fuels.
   demonstration. LCA XVIII,
   Fort Collins, CO,
   September 25-27, 2018.
   Retrieved online.            Carbon Methodology                                                                                 4
                                     Amazon Sustainability



                                     For well-to-tank impacts, the emissions model estimates the carbon-intensity of the “well”
                                     fuels (e.g., grams of CO₂e per megajoule) based on data and logic from Argonne National
                                     Laboratory’s Greenhouse Gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy Use in Transportation
                                     (GREET) model.9 GREET is an LCA tool used to evaluate various transportation fuels like diesel,
                                     gasoline, hydrogen, natural gas, and biofuels. For tank-to-wheel, we use transportation fuel
                                     related emission factors from both GREET and the United Kingdom’s Department of
                                     Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). Fuel consumption rates for vehicles are based
                                     on fleet averages from a variety of country and region-specific sources, including the U.S. EPA,
                                     U.S. Department of Energy, European Union, United Nations, and the International Council for
                                     Clean Transportation.

                                     Supplier Provided Transportation of Products and Equipment

                                     For some segments of Amazon’s logistics network, we receive emissions directly from third-
                                     party transportation providers. These providers calculate emissions using Smart Freight
                                     Centre Accredited tools10 that follow Global Logistic Emissions Council methodology, and we
                                     evaluate and include the supplier provided “well-to-wheel” emissions when available.

                                     Customer Trips to Stores

                                     Our model calculates the aggregate emissions from customer trips to Amazon’s physical
                                     stores (i.e., Whole Foods Market, Amazon Fresh and Amazon Go) using publicly available
                                     travel behavior information from the Federal Highway Administration’s National Household
                                     Travel Survey (NHTS). The model focuses on the following three variables that affect
                                     emissions for this category of activities:

                                     Distance driven – We use NHTS data to estimate the typical distance a customer drives for
                                     “goods purchasing” based on their setting (e.g., urban, suburban, or rural). We assume customers
                                     only travel to a single destination and that all trips are direct and round trip.

                                     Mode of transportation used – NHTS data indicates how likely a customer is to use a certain
                                     mode of transportation among the following five categories: car, light-duty truck (e.g., truck,
                                     SUV, van), transit (e.g., bus, rail), non-motorized (e.g., walking, biking), and other.

                                     Total customer trips per year – We estimate the number of customer trips to each physical
                                     store based on the store’s setting (e.g., urban, suburban, or rural).

                                     After assembling the data and emissions factors for all vehicle and transportation modes, and
                                     estimated trips per store, we multiply the distance traveled by each mode by the appropriate
                                     emissions factor to each store. Finally, we multiply that product by the total number of
                                     customer transactions in the year.
9. Wang, M., Elgowainy, A.,
    Lu, Z, Baek, K. H., Bafana,
    A., Benavides, P. T.,            Refrigerant Emissions Model
    Burnham, A., Cai, H.,
    Cappello, V., Chen, P.,
    Gan, Y., Gracida-Alvarez,        Emissions related to cooling and refrigeration are present across Amazon’s global operations.
    U. R., Hawkins, T. R., Iyer,
    R. K., Kelly, J. C., Kim, T.,
                                     These occur through normal business processes such as the cooling of our data centers,
    Kumar, S., Kwon, H., Lee,
    K., Lee, U., Liu, X., Masum,
    F., Ng, C., Ou, L., Reddi, K.,
                                     corporate offices, and fulfillment facilities, and refrigeration for our Whole Foods Market
    Siddique, N., Sun, P.,           stores and other grocery operations. We calculate the emissions associated with refrigerant
    Vyawahare, P., Xu, H., and
    Zaimes, G. Greenhouse
                                     materials across Amazon’s facilities through a combination of data collection mechanisms.
    gases, Regulated                 Where primary data is unavailable, we use estimation based on each facility’s type and size, or
    Emissions, and Energy use
    in Technologies Model ®
                                     intensity of electricity usage in the case of data centers. Amazon’s refrigerant emissions are
    (2022 .Net). Computer            represented by total leakage of refrigerant material which occurs through normal operations
    Software. USDOE Office
    of Energy Efficiency and         multiplied by the global warming potential (GWP) of the specific material used.
    Renewable Energy (EERE).
    10 Oct. 2022. Web.
    doi:10.11578/GREET-Net-
    2022/dc.20220908.2.
10. https://www.smartfreight
    centre.org                       Carbon Methodology                                                                                 5
Amazon Sustainability



Energy Emissions Model

We calculate the carbon footprint of energy used from purchased electricity, and fuel used for
back-up power generation and heating across Amazon’s facilities, including data centers,
fulfillment network facilities, retail stores, and corporate offices. Electricity emissions factors
account for direct power plant emissions, as well as upstream emissions, and transmission and
distribution losses. Fuel emission factors account for combustion of fuels and upstream
emissions associated with fuel production. The primary source of carbon emissions for our
facilities is the electricity used to power our operations. We collect usage data from our
facilities around the globe and process data from utility invoices to gain visibility into
electricity and fuel usage. When usage data is unavailable, we estimate usage based on the
usage from facilities with similar characteristics (size, type, location). In the case of data center
back-up power generation, we use an estimate of fuel consumption based on the intensity of
electricity use at the site. We then calculate carbon emissions by multiplying actual or
estimated usage by the appropriate emission factor (e.g., regional electricity grid mix, CO₂e
per kWh, or fuel combusted CO₂e per liter).

For electricity specifically, we use the GHGp’s market-based method to demonstrate the
impact of our renewable energy investments. For more information on our renewable energy
measurements in support of our goal of matching 100% of the electricity consumed by our
global operations with renewable energy, see our Renewable Energy Methodology.

Calculating the carbon emissions of energy relies on accurate emissions factors data from a
variety of local, national, and regional sources. For example, electricity consumed by a site is
multiplied by an emissions factor specific to its locality. Carbon from electricity generation
varies widely by utility provider, state, country, and region due to the variety of technologies
used for generation. Some countries rely heavily on coal, while other regions use significant
amounts of low-carbon wind or hydropower. Our emissions model assigns the most precise
emissions factors available for each facility based on its location. When supplier specific
emission factors are not available, we assign state, province, sub-region or region level
factors, and then national averages. In the U.S., the authoritative emissions factor sources
come from the EPA’s eGrid data (electricity emissions by U.S. grid sub-region), while the
International Energy Agency provides average electricity emissions per kWh for almost every
country in the world. For heating, we use fuel combustion emission factors from UK DEFRA in
our energy model.

Packaging Emissions Model

Amazon uses a detailed emissions model to quantify the carbon footprint of each type of
Amazon packaging (e.g., corrugate boxes or envelopes) from production to end-of-life.
Carbon emissions are released during the raw material extraction, processing, manufacturing,
and disposal of packaging. Our environmental packaging model quantifies the carbon
footprint of every package from manufacture to end-of-life given key parameters like
material type, mass, and dimension. In total, the emissions model produces life cycle carbon
emissions factors for hundreds of packages based on Amazon’s data on packaging materials,
thickness, and recycling rates. We apply region-specific packaging emissions factors (where
available) on a per-package basis to outbound shipments to calculate total emissions from
packaging. The calculation covers emissions from raw materials and intermediate products,
transportation overbox manufacturing, and end-of-life packaging (i.e., recycling or disposal).
This service uses industry-standard LCA data from commercial LCA databases and supplier
specific LCAs to model the impacts of raw materials and manufacturing processes.




Carbon Methodology                                                                                      6
                                Amazon Sustainability



                                Amazon Devices Emissions Model

                                We quantify the carbon footprint of Amazon devices sold during a given year using detailed
                                data on the components of each device and the quantity sold each year. We produce detailed,
                                parameterized models for our major device types, including Fire TV, Echo, Fire Tablets, Kindle,
                                Ring, and Blink. We calculate the carbon footprint of each device type by inspecting the
                                device’s “Bill of Materials”—which details the mass and makeup of each component used in a
                                device—and model life cycle emissions of each component using supplier specific inputs and a
                                mix of commercially and publicly available LCA databases. After each stage of the life cycle is
                                modeled, our research team creates emissions factors for each device by aggregating the
                                carbon emissions from the manufacturing, transportation, and device end-of-life phases. We
                                scale these emissions factors by the quantity sold to estimate the carbon footprint associated
                                with manufacturing, transportation, and the end-of-life treatment of all Amazon devices sold
                                in a given year. To calculate the emissions associated with the use of our devices, our
                                methodology relies on telemetry data to determine the number of active devices in the field.
                                We then multiply that by each device’s average annual energy use. See our Devices Product
                                Carbon Footprint Methodology for more information.

                                To match our customer’s use of their devices with renewable energy sources, we calculate the
                                emissions associated with the electricity grid that corresponds to the country in which the
                                device is located. The electricity consumption is matched via renewable energy investments
                                and is allocated in accordance with GHG Protocol market boundaries to offset average
                                electricity grid emissions. Overall, annual emissions for devices are then determined by
                                combining the annual emissions from all life cycle phases.11

                                Amazon Branded and Supplier-Provided Product Emissions

                                To calculate emissions associated with Amazon Private and Whole Foods Exclusive Brand
                                products, we use LCA emission factors both by unit and weight sold from Amazon.com and
                                Whole Food Markets. These LCAs are sourced from internal or external analysis, or supplier
                                provided assessments based on the bill of materials and characteristic of the supply chain.
                                Also covered by this approach, Amazon uses supplier provided LCAs to calculate the emissions
                                from equipment used in Amazon’s operations and supply chain such as warehouse carts and
                                vehicles.

                                Amazon Building and Emissions Model

                                Amazon accounts for emissions for the use of our buildings within our other models but we
                                incorporate the emissions associated with building lifecycle such as the materials and
                                manufacturing, transportation of those components to the site, and construction in a separate
                                building model.

                                Based on each building design, we built a model to calculate the emissions associated with
                                the construction of Amazon facilities. These incorporate individual building plans, materials,
                                internally and externally developed LCAs, and supplier provided data to estimate each
                                building’s emissions based on the actual building design or similar building designs based on
                                similar characteristics (i.e., type, size and location).

                                Business Travel Emissions Model

                                For emissions from air and rail travel, mileage and car rentals, Amazon provides trip level
                                details including travel origin, destination, mode of transport (such as aircraft type, class of
                                service, aircraft seating, etc.), and associated costs to a third-party partner. Using a
11.   See our Device
                                hierarchical approach based on specificity of data, a distance-based approach is prioritized to
      Renewable Energy          calculate each trip’s emissions using the provided detail multiplied by supplier specific,
      Methodology for more
      information on Device’s
      renewable energy
      matching calculation.     Carbon Methodology                                                                                 7
Amazon Sustainability



regional, UK DEFRA, and International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)+ derived emission
factors. Amazon then combines these individual trip calculations to determine our total
business travel emissions.

Employee Commute Emissions Model

We estimate the emissions associated with employees commuting to and from work at
Amazon locations using a model that follows the GHGp recommended distance-based
approach for employee commute estimation. We conduct a representative survey to
understand how employees commute each day and what mode of transportation they use,
such as walking, carpooling, biking, driving alone, or taking public transportation. Using the
survey results, we generate estimated emission factors based on the distances employees
reported traveling, the percentage of employees using each transportation mode, the
associated mode’s tailpipe emission factor based on available national, regional, and industry
data sources. Finally, we multiplied the emission factors by the number of employees and the
frequency of their commute to calculate the Amazon employee commute carbon emissions.




Carbon Methodology                                                                               8
