INDEPENDENT VALIDATION OPINION DECLARATION


To: The Stakeholders of Amazon Web Services, Inc.

Introduction and objectives of work
Apex Companies, LLC (Apex) was engaged to conduct an independent validation of Amazon
Web Services, Inc.’s (AWS) customer carbon footprint methodology, a model developed by
Amazon to quantify customer-specific greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with the
use of AWS cloud services. This declaration applies to the related information included within
the scope of work described below.

Scope of work
The scope of our work was limited to review of select Scope 3 GHG emissions data generation
and the validation of the methodology developed by AWS for calculating and allocating
greenhouse gas emissions associated with customers’ use of AWS services, as described in
the AWS customer carbon footprint methodology document released in October 2025 (model
version 3.0). Verification of Amazon’s Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3 emissions outside of our
platform validation from which customer emissions are allocated was not included in our scope
of work.

Criteria against which validation was conducted:
The information reported by AWS’ carbon footprint tools needs to be read and understood
together with the following standards:
    •   World Resources Institute (WRI)/World Business Council for Sustainable Development
        (WBCSD) Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting
        Standard
    •   WRI/WBCSD GHG Protocol Scope 2 Guidance
    •   WRI/WBCSD Greenhouse Gas Protocol Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting
        and Reporting Standard
    •   ISO 14064-1:2018 – Greenhouse gases – Part 1: Specification with guidance at the
        organizational level for quantification and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions and
        removals
AWS based its calculation methodology on the principles and allocation methods described in
these standards.

Reporting Boundary
    ▪   AWS’ Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG emissions arising from activities that directly support
        the provision of cloud services for AWS’ customers.1
    ▪   Select AWS Scope 3 GHG emissions arising from activities that directly support the
        provision of cloud services for AWS’ customers.
             o   Category 2, Capital Goods
             o   Category 3, Fuel and Energy-Related Activities
             o   Category 4, Upstream Transportation and Distribution
    ▪   Exclusions:
             o   Scope 1


1 The reported Scope 1 emissions include HCFC-22, a hydrochlorofluorocarbon, which is not reportable

under the GHGP. The GHGP requires that emissions from HCFCs and other non-Kyoto Protocol gases
be reported separately from the scopes.
                                                                                           Page 2


                     ▪   Emissions associated with fuel combustion in fleet vehicles.
                     ▪   Emissions associated with AWS warehouses and manufacturing
                         facilities, offices, and sites that are run in customer facilities (Amazon
                         Cloud Extension, Embedded Points of Presence, Outpost sites).
            o   Scope 2
                   ▪ Emissions associated with operations in facilities beyond data
                       centers, such as AWS warehouses and manufacturing facilities,
                       offices, and sites run in customer facilities

            o   All Other Scope 3 GHG emissions
Level of Assurance and Qualifications
    •   Level of Assurance: Limited
    •   This validation used a materiality threshold of ±5% for aggregate errors in sampled
        data.

Responsibilities

The preparation and presentation of the data reported by Amazon is the sole responsibility of
Amazon.

Apex was not involved in the determination of the reported data. Our responsibilities were to:

    ▪   Provide limited assurance about whether the methodology, data generation, and
        calculations employed by the customer carbon footprint model have been performed in
        accordance with the Reporting Criteria; and,

    ▪   Form an independent conclusion based on the assurance procedures performed and
        evidence obtained.

Reference Standard
We performed our work in accordance with ISO 14064-3:2019 - Greenhouse gases -- Part 3:
Specification with guidance for the validation and verification of greenhouse gas assertions.

Summary of work performed
 As part of Apex’s validation, the following activities were undertaken:
1. Interviews with relevant personnel responsible for development of the AWS customer
   carbon footprint calculation model;
2. Review of the data collection and consolidation processes used to compile the reported
   information, including assessing assumptions made, and the data scope and reporting
   boundaries; and,
3. Review of Amazon’s data and information systems used for collection, aggregation,
   analysis and review of the reported information.

Conclusion
On the basis of our methodology and the activities described above:
    ▪   Nothing has come to our attention to indicate that the methodology employed by
        Amazon for their carbon footprint tools is not fairly calculating and reporting client-
        specific Scope 1, 2, and select Scope 3 emissions associated with AWS cloud services
        in all material respects.
                                                                                           Page 3


Statement of Independence, Impartiality and Competence
Apex is an independent professional services company that specialises in environmental,
health, safety and social accountability with over 30 years history. Its assurance team has
extensive experience in conducting verification over environmental, social, ethical and health
and safety information, systems and processes.
Apex has implemented a Code of Ethics across the business to maintain high ethical standards
among staff in their day-to-day business activities. We are particularly vigilant in the prevention
of conflicts of interest. No member of the assurance team has a business relationship with
Amazon, AWS, its Directors or Managers beyond that required of this assignment. We have
conducted this verification independently, and there has been no conflict of interest.
The verification team has extensive experience in conducting assurance over environmental,
social, ethical and health and safety information, systems and processes, has over 20 years
combined experience in this field and an excellent understanding of Apex’s standard
methodology for the verification of GHG-related data.

Attestation:




Trevor A. Donaghu,                                 Mary E. Armstrong-Friberg,
Lead Verifier                                      Technical Reviewer
ESG Director                                       ESG Senior Program Manager



                 Apex Companies, LLC
                 Pleasant Hill, California
                 October 3rd, 2025
