                                                   Carbon accounting in the Cloud:
                                              a methodology for allocating emissions across
                                                           data center users
arXiv:2406.09645v1 [cs.SE] 14 Jun 2024




                                                                    Ian Schneider∗, Taylor Mattia∗†
                                                                                   June 2024



                                         1      Introduction
                                         Google has undertaken considerable efforts to reduce electricity consumption
                                         and the associated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from its electricity use. By
                                         2022, Google delivered approximately three times as much computing power
                                         with the same amount of electrical power as it did five years prior [1].1 Google
                                         uses 5.5 times less overhead energy for every unit of information-technology
                                         (IT) equipment energy, compared to the industry average [1]. Even with these
                                         dramatic improvements in efficiency, Google consumed 22 TWh of electricity in
                                         2022, with the majority of its electricity consumption coming from data center
                                         operations [1].
                                             To reach its sustainability goals, NetZero [2] and 24/7 carbon-free energy
                                         (CFE) [3], and to better serve its customers, Google has embarked on a sub-
                                         stantial effort to better understand its data center electricity use and carbon
                                         footprint. While Google has been carefully measuring its aggregate operational
                                         electricity use for a decade, starting in 2020 it began a new effort to develop
                                         granular data on hourly electricity consumption and carbon emissions by prod-
                                         uct and by location. This information helps Google better target efforts for
                                         data center efficiency and flexibility [4, 5]. It allows Google to provide carbon
                                             ∗ Google, Data Scientist - Research
                                            † Thank you to our colleagues at Google who helped shape and improve this paper and the

                                         data pipelines and software system it describes. Thank you especially to Thomas Olavson,
                                         Savannah Goodman, Maud Texier, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan, who helped shape the
                                         direction of the paper and provided critical feedback to improve our drafts. Thank you also
                                         to Cynthia Wu and the Cloud Carbon Footprint team who supported this work and drafted
                                         the first public descriptions of the methodology described in detail here. Thank you to David
                                         Lo, Arif Merchant, Chrissy Patterson, Vincent Poncet and Cooper Elsworth for feedback on
                                         the draft. Thank you to Brock Taute, Tim Huang, Shannon Lane, Luka Rekhviashvili, and
                                         others who helped improve the software implementation of the data pipeline described in this
                                         paper.
                                            1 According to Google’s platform-neutral measurement for central processing unit (CPU)

                                         resources analyzed over a five-year period.


                                                                                       1
reporting data for enterprise customers of multiple Google products, including
Google Cloud and Workspace. It also allows Google to better quantify the
carbon emissions of user products, like Maps or Meet.
    This paper outlines the approach that Google developed to quantify location-
based emissions of its individual products. There are five primary areas of com-
plexity. First, Google data centers have millions of different devices, including
hundreds of distinct component and machine types, consuming electricity all
over the world. We need to measure the electricity consumption of as many of
these devices as possible and fill in the gaps when electricity measurements are
not reliably available. Second, Google’s “warehouse-scale computer” approach
means that many data center resources are shared across teams and products
[6]. This drives higher efficiency, but presents accounting challenges. Third,
Google creates many products and services that are used not only by exter-
nal users, but also by company employees and internal teams. This circularity
needs to be accounted for in an honest allocation of emissions. Fourth, Google
consumes electricity all over the world, so we need reliable and comprehensive
mechanisms for estimating carbon emissions in many different locations, many
of which do not have reporting standards sufficient for our granular data require-
ments. Fifth, we have physical data that correlates with energy consumption
in many but not all domains. For some calculations we need to fall back on al-
location of energy and emissions by economic factors instead of using preferred
physical factors, in line with the the Greenhouse Gas Protocol’s recommenda-
tion [7].


2    Literature and State-of-the-art
Data center electricity consumption and related emissions make up a meaningful
share of global totals. In 2022, data centers accounted for 2% of global electricity
demand, and the electricity demand from data centers is forecasted to double
by 2026 [8].
    A critical way to reduce data center emissions is through more accurate ac-
counting and improved disclosure [9], to enable users–especially large business
users due to their scale–to make their own decisions to reduce emissions. Says
[10], “although many organizations publicly report their carbon emissions, im-
proved accounting (e.g., broader participation as well as standardized accounting
and disclosures) will provide further guidance on tackling salient challenges in
realizing environmentally sustainable systems.”
    In addition to and alongside the climate benefits, better accounting and
disclosure enable higher-quality corporate reporting of carbon emissions. Exist-
ing research summarizes corporate carbon reporting [11]. For a Cloud-provider
like Google, accurate accounting and disclosure meet essential needs of ma-
jor customers. These customers want (or, soon, could be required) to report
their carbon emissions, and many are interested in taking steps to reduce their
Cloud-related data center emissions.
    Customers and innovators are increasingly demanding accurate accounting


                                         2
of their own carbon footprint from their use of Cloud and other digital technolo-
gies. When a customer uses Cloud-based services like Google Cloud Platform,
all of the Google Cloud emissions relevant to serving their needs fall under the
customer’s Scope 3 reporting. For more information on Scope 3 reporting by
sector, see [12]. Research shows that historically, most companies have not com-
pletely reported Scope 3 in their CDP (formerly the Carbon Disclosure Project)
Reporting [13]. However, this is changing as companies seek to lead in this sec-
tor, and, increasingly, when companies are required by regulation. As of March
2024, we saw that so many of our Google Cloud customers monitor and review
their emissions, that over 50% of carbon emissions are already being monitored.
Disclosure is also important for growing technologies like machine learning; re-
searchers have suggested [14] including efficiency as a specific evaluation criteria
of machine learning models.
     The approach that we developed and present here uses a mix of estimation,
energy profiling, and internal resource and cost accounting. Prior research used
workload proxies or measured workload duration to estimate energy consump-
tion and carbon footprint of datacenter workloads like ML training [15, 16].
However, estimated energy consumption can differ substantially from direct
measurements, [17] and thus direct measurements of energy consumption (as we
use in [17] and here) are much preferred when available. At the organizational
level, direct measurements are not sufficient on their own because datacenter
machines and workloads can be shared amongst multiple users in a modern com-
pany and Cloud provider like Google. The primary contribution of this work
is a clear methodology for allocating energy consumption to multiple users of
shared data center machines, infrastructure, and software.
     Besides improvements in accounting and measurement, another important
area of the literature focuses on efforts to reduce the energy consumption and
carbon footprint of data centers. [18] summarizes industry energy efficiency ef-
forts and [6] provides helpful information on Google-specific efforts to improve
energy efficiency. Google has also worked on some specific new technologies
to reduce the carbon footprint of data center compute, such as carbon-aware
computing which shifts loads to times and data center locations where more
carbon-free energy is available from the grid [4]. Research by Google shows how
efficiency best practices and carbon-free energy procurement have helped dra-
matically reduce the carbon emissions associated with training machine learning
models [19]. Our hope is that improved accounting and estimation of carbon
emissions can help identify key opportunity areas and catalyze new innovation
to further reduce data center energy consumption and carbon emissions.


3    Methodology
This section describes the main contribution of this paper–a detailed descrip-
tion of the methodology used for granular product-level energy allocation and
location-based carbon emissions accounting at Google. This accounting method-
ology forms the backbone of our Google Cloud Carbon Footprint reporting prod-


                                         3
uct [20] and allows us to estimate the carbon emissions associated with many
of Google’s products and services.
    The methodology uses a mix of physical allocation, when available, and eco-
nomic allocation when physical data or factors are not available. The Green-
house Gas Protocol’s Scope 3 Standard [7], which provides guidelines for corpo-
rate carbon reporting, says to “consider physical allocation,” but that if physical
data is not available or is not cost-effective to gather, to “allocate using eco-
nomic factors” [7]. While building the Google Cloud Carbon Footprint product,
we identified several cases where physical data is not available, is too expensive
to collect, or where we have been unable to evaluate and verify the connection
between available physical data and emissions. In these cases, we use economic
allocation instead of physical allocation. This paper describes the current state,
aligned with the Greenhouse Gas Protocol, where we use physical allocation
when physical data is available and allocation by economic factors when physical
data is not available. If more physical data becomes available, we will continue
to improve the product over time by switching to allocation using physical data
when possible. This will improve the accuracy of our Carbon Footprint data
and help make it more actionable.
    First, we define some key concepts used throughout the section. Then,
we explain the methodology boundary and exclusions. Next, we explain the
allocation methodology used for different machine types and components of
power usage. Then, we describe the reallocation that handles internal use of
shared Google services. Next, we explain how we incorporate carbon emissions
measurements. Finally, we explain how we allocate carbon emissions to Google
Cloud customers for the Google Cloud Carbon Footprint reporting platform.

3.1    Key Concepts
   • Borg: a system for cluster management at Google. See [21] for more
     information. Borg monitoring systems provide resource usage and power
     consumption data, which we use to estimate machine energy and allocate
     it to users.
   • Busy power: the maximum power draw from a machine while running
     actual workloads in a data center.
   • Cluster: a group of production machines that (typically) share a com-
     mon local network infrastructure and are located in a single datacenter
     building.

   • Dedicated machine: A datacenter machine with a single machine owner,
     a single production group that controls access to and operates the machine.
     Non-dedicated machines are called shared machines.
   • Dynamic power: the measured power draw from a machine, minus the
     machine’s idle power.



                                        4
• GCU: Google Compute Unit, a platform neutral measurement for central
  processing unit (CPU) resources [22]. Different processors are assigned a
  GCU-per-core rating by bench-marking the processor’s performance. In
  the pipeline implementation, when CPUs of different machines have dif-
  ferent performance, we use the GCU concept to normalize across different
  CPUs.
• HDD: Hard disk drive, responsible for data storage.
• Idle power: the minimum power draw from a machine when it is active
  in a data center, for example if it is powered on but not running any
  workloads.

• Location-based emissions: Carbon footprint based on electricity con-
  sumption in Google’s datacenters, not accounting for any direct clean
  energy purchases made by Google.
• Machine owner: for dedicated machines, the single production group
  that controls access to the machine.

• Market-based emissions: Carbon footprint based on electricity con-
  sumption in Google’s datacenters, accounting for clean energy purchases
  made by Google.
• Production group: Permissions groups used for production services.
  These are groups that control resource usage.
• Production job: High-priority machine tasks, for example, long-running
  server jobs, which take priority in Borg over lower-priority non-production
  jobs (often batch jobs).
• PUE: total datacenter power divided by information technology (IT)
  power.
• RAM: Random-access memory.
• Resource allocation: The amount of a particular resource that is re-
  served for a particular production group or user. Production jobs will
  often have resource allocations higher than resource usage, so they can
  easily scale up (pushing out non-production jobs) to meet external de-
  mands. See Section 5.5 in [21] for more information.
• Resource usage: The amount of a particular resource, e.g. GCUs, GiBs
  of memory, or TiBs of HDD, used by a particular production group or
  user. See Section 5.5 in [21] for more information.
• Shared machine: A datacenter machine with a multiple internal users.




                                    5
   • Shared service: An internal product whereby a team provides a com-
     bination of software and resources (i.e. disk space and the tools to easily
     store data in a redundant manner) to other internal users. Examples
     include Bigtable and Spanner.
   • SSD: Drive that uses solid-state memory to store persistent data.

   • User: A production group or collection of production groups. For ex-
     ample, the user Compute Engine refers to a group of production groups
     that build and operate the public Google Compute Engine (GCE) prod-
     uct. Similarly, you can think of Google Search or YouTube, or a sub-
     components of those teams, as being a single user.

3.2    Boundaries and Exclusions
Google’s data center energy and emissions measurement is the approach that
forms the backbone of the Scope 2 Google Cloud Carbon Footprint reporting
methodology, and as such, the boundaries and exclusions are the same as are
described in our public methodology [20].2
    The inventory boundary we use is for Scope 2 emissions resulting from elec-
tricity use by Google-owned or Google-operated data centers, including that
from compute and networking equipment as well as ancillary electricity services
such as cooling and lighting.
    The Scope 2 Carbon Footprint report excludes emissions arising from the
following activities:
   • Generating electricity that is subsequently lost during transmission and
     distribution.
   • Extraction and transportation of fuels used to generate grid electricity,
     and the life-cycle emissions associated with the generation facilities and
     equipment.
   • All Scope 1 emissions, including for example fugitive emissions from HVAC
     system coolants.

   • Emissions arising from small equipment deployments at internet service
     providers’ partners.
   • Emissions from Google networking equipment deployed outside data cen-
     ters.
   • Downstream end-of-life emissions of data center equipment and buildings.
   2 The Google Cloud Carbon Report also includes estimates of per-customer emissions re-

lated to Google’s Scope 1 and Scope 3 emissions. Those estimates are described in [20].
This paper focuses on the Scope 2 methodology so the boundary of this paper only includes
activities related to Scope 2 emissions.




                                           6
3.3    Machine Power Allocation
Google’s data centers support a large variety of machine types and workload
types. A few features of warehouse-scale datacenters make an allocation of
machine power to users especially complicated:
  1. Google datacenter clusters include dedicated machines, which are operated
     by a single user, and shared machines, which can be operated by multiple
     users, even simultaneously.
  2. In a datacenter cluster, resources are shared by production and non-
     production jobs. At Google, production jobs are allocated about 70%
     of the total GCU resources and represent about 60% of the total GCU
     usage; they are allocated about 55% of the total memory and represent
     about 85% of the total memory usage [21].
  3. Workloads are highly heterogeneous, with different usage patterns and
     resource requirements. While higher utilization of machines can help re-
     duce costs and energy consumption, datacenters may require additional
     machines to meet daily and seasonal demand patterns or sudden increases
     in resource demand.
  4. Server energy consumption is not proportional. While idle, a server on
     average uses approximately 45% of its peak power consumption, or ap-
     proximately 60% of its average energy consumption [23]. If one task is
     running on a machine at 40% utilization and it is joined by a second task
     with the same resource requirements, doubling utilization to 80%, power
     consumption will not double; rather it will go up by approximately 30%.
    To balance these complexities with the need for a simple and explainable
approach, we separate the allocation of idle power and dynamic power for shared
machines. Reported idle power is approximately constant for each machine–it
is the power a machine consumes even if it’s not in use. However, at the data
center level, idle power can vary hour-to-hour based on various changes like
machine failures, upgrades, and down-time. Dynamic power is the additional
power consumed, above and beyond idle power, and it can vary significantly as
the utilization or job requirements on a particular machine can change (see, e.g
Figure 2 below). Let pm,h be the measured power and irm,h be the recorded idle
power of machine m in hour h, respectively. Measured power is sampled every
five minutes, with the hourly measured power pm,h being the average sampled
value of the five minute intervals. We define and calculate idle power as follows:
                            im,h = min{irm,h , pm,h }.                        (1)
Then, dynamic power is calculated as:
                              dm,h = pm,h − im,h .                            (2)
The adjustment accounts for potential mis-configured idle power readings, en-
suring that im,h ≤ pm,h and dm,h ≥ 0.


                                        7
   Next, we allocate the measured power to internal Google users. The overall
approach is as follows:
   1. Allocate idle power of dedicated machines to the machine owner.
   2. Allocate idle power of shared machines proportional to a power-weighted
      blend of resource allocations (of GCU, HDD, SSD, RAM) in the cluster
      where the shared machine is located.
   3. Allocate dynamic power of a machine to the real-time machine users, pro-
      portional to their GCU usage on the machine in the particular hour under
      consideration.

    The basic idea of our approach is that demand for resource allocations–of
dedicated machines, GCUs, RAM, HDD, and SSD–drives idle power of ma-
chines, since demand for resource availability drives the deployment of machines.
The actual usage of these machines drives their dynamic power; if machines are
not used, they consume power at a rate approximately equal to their idle power
rating.
    This approach helps address the four main issues outlined above. First, it
enables different treatment of dedicated and shared machines, and it allows for
the power of shared machines to be allocated to and divided across multiple
users. Second, it suggests a reasonably fair way of balancing the impact of pro-
duction and non-production jobs, where production jobs have higher footprint
due to their associated resource allocations. Third, it handles heterogeneous
jobs and resource requirements by having idle power distributed proportional
to a blend of resource-types. Finally, even though server energy consumption is
not proportional to CPU usage, dynamic power is more closely proportional to
CPU usage, so by separating the allocation mechanisms for idle and dynamic
power we can more safely assume that dynamic power is roughly proportional
to resource usage.3
    Before we detail the approach, consider a simplified example detailed in
Figure 1 to highlight the main features: a 16MW data center cluster with a
single user running production jobs and a single user running non-production
jobs. Assume we measure that utilization of the machines is 80% during the
day and 60% at night, with the prod user contributing 75% of of the utilization
during the day and 50% of the utilization at night. Assume that the prod
user has all of the resource allocation for this cluster: they have control of the
resources and can run when they need to, usurping the non-prod user. Assume
also that the idle power of the machines is 6MW, but the measured power
consumption from the machines is 12 MW at 60% utilization and 14MW at
80% utilization. Then, under our allocation rules, the prod user is assigned the
6MW idle power during all hours of the day. The two users split the dynamic
power proportional to their utilization. In all, the prod user is allocated 12
   3 Note that we are not assuming that dynamic power is proportional to CPU usage. Rather,

we measure dynamic power directly and argue that the dynamic power can be fairly allocated
to users proportional to their CPU usage, when there are multiple users.



                                            8
     80%
                    Non-production jobs
   Utilization
   Machine



                      Production jobs




  14 MW
                                                                Machine dynamic
   Consumption




                                                                power allocated
     Power




                                                                proportional to
                                                                utilization
                                                                   Machine idle
                                                                   power allocated
                                                                   to resource
                                                                   owner




Figure 1: A simplified example of energy allocation in a datacenter with diurnal
usage patterns and no shared services. One user (blue) is responsible for all pro-
duction jobs and resource allocations; the other (orange) runs non-production
jobs. In the upper chart, the example utilization values would be measured. In
the lower chart, power is measured, while the proportion of power to allocate
to each user is calculated based on utilization measurements and the described
formulas.


MW during the day and 9 MW at night. The non-prod user is allocated 2 MW
during the day, 3 MW at night.
    Figure 2 is a graph of idle, dynamic, and total power for a single cluster of
servers from September 18 - September 24, 2023. Note that the amount of idle
power is (slightly) larger than dynamic power, and remember that total power
is the sum of idle power and dynamic power.
    The following sections detail the full methodology used to allocate energy
and emissions to internal users. Figure 3 provides a detailed flow chart of the
overall process that is described in detail in those sections.

3.3.1            Machine Idle Power Allocation
For both dedicated and shared machines, idle power is measured and calculated
according to equation (1). Previous studies have shown that idle power corre-
sponds to approximately 60% of average server energy consumption [23], with


                                          9
Figure 2: The amount of idle power, dynamic power, and total power consumed
per hour for a specific Google Cloud cluster, as a percentage of the weekly
average total power.


dynamic power (as defined by (1)) corresponding to the remaining 40% of server
energy consumption.
    We use a different methodology to allocate that idle power, depending on
whether the machine is a dedicated or shared machine. For dedicated machines,
we allocate the idle power of the machine to the machine owner. The machine
owner is a specific production group that is labelled as the owner of the ma-
chine in Google’s internal data. Dedicated ownership of machines is common
for users that require isolation or more flexibility regarding the machine types
they deploy; example users are ML Infrastructure and Google Cloud’s Compute
Engine. For dedicated machines, power allocation is simple. We look at an in-
ternal tag which denotes machine owner–the production group that owns these
machines–and assign all of the idle power of these machines to that production
group. This does not imply that all of the energy consumption and carbon
footprint associated with these machines will be associated with the machine
owner in our final data set, because if the machine owner operates an internal
shared service, some of that energy and carbon may be reallocated (see Section
3.4) to the users of that internal shared service.
    For shared machines, we allocate idle power of all machines in each cluster
proportional to the power-weighted resource allocation of each user in the clus-
ter. Let S be the set of shared machines. For this section, consider a particular
hour h; in each equation, we drop the subscript h for simplicity. Then,
                                                                    P for a par-
ticular cluster C the total idle power of the shared machines is m∈C,m∈S im .
For a particular user j, their fraction of the cluster idle power, fj,C is given by




                                        10
Figure 3: High-level overview of the process of allocating energy and carbon
emissions to internal Google users.


the following equation:

                 cGCU rj,C
                       GCU
                           + cRAM rj,C
                                   RAM
                                       + cHDD rj,C
                                               HDD
                                                   + cSSD rj,C
                                                           SSD
      fj,C = P         GCU r GCU + cRAM r RAM + cHDD r HDD + cSSD r SSD )
                j (c        j,C          j,C          j,C          j,C

For some resource type R, cR is the power weighting of the resource and rj,C   R

is user j’s allocation of shared resource R in cluster C. User j’s allocation of
shared machine idle power in cluster C isP  the product of two terms, fj,C and the
total idle power of the shared machines, m∈C,m∈S im . Note that the equation
does not include allocation of any ML-specific resources, because, as mentioned
above, nearly all ML machines are operated as dedicated machines.
    The power weightings come from internal estimates of the busy power asso-
ciated with each resource type. While it might be more accurate to use internal
estimates of idle power for this use-case, we use busy power because its readily
available internally and because it has multiple internal use-cases so we have
higher confidence that the data can be maintained as accurate and current.
In either case, the goal is to get a power-weighting to normalize and combine
allocations across different metric types. The following chart summarizes the
weightings by showing approximately how many units of each resource draws
the equivalent power of 1 CPU core; we refresh the internal data approximately
quarterly, and new machine generations often lead to marked improvements, as
evidenced by the previously mentioned fact that, as of 2022, Google delivered
approximately three times as much computing power with the same amount of
electrical power as it did five years prior [1].




                                         11
                    Resources with equivalent busy power
                    1   Intel Skylake N1 CPU Core
                    20 GiB RAM
                    1   TiB SSD
                    6   TiB HDD

   In summary, the total idle power allocated to user j in cluster C is
                             X                   X
                  Ij,C =            im + fj,C           im .
                           m∈C,m∈Dj             m∈C,m∈S

The first term is the sum of idle power of the dedicated machines owned by user
j in cluster C, where Dj is the set of dedicated machines owned by user j. The
second term is user j’s allocation of idle power from shared machines in cluster
C as explained above.

3.3.2   Machine Dynamic Power Allocation
For each machine, we calculate the dynamic power in each hour, using equations
(1) and (2). We allocate dynamic power to users proportional to their fraction
of the machine’s host GCU usage within that hour window. Let GCUi,m be the
GCU usage by user i on machine m (in a particular hour h, but dropping the h
for simplicity). Then the dynamic power for a particular user j in cluster C is
                                X       GCUj,m
                                                    
                        Dj,C =       dm P             .
                                m∈C       i GCUi,m

    User j’s dynamic power allocation in cluster C is the sum of their dynamic
power allocation for each machine in cluster C for which they have non-zero
GCU usage. On each machine, dynamic power is allocated to users proportional
to their GCU usage in that particular hour.
    The approach, allocating dynamic power proportional to GCU-usage, was
chosen for its relatively accuracy and simplicity, but it does not capture all of
the nuances of machine dynamic power usage. For example, if two users each
use half of the GCU capacity on a machine, but the second user has much higher
memory usage, then in reality the second user is probably responsible for more
than half of the machine’s dynamic power usage. In our view, this means that
we are possibly underestimating the true dynamic power allocation for users
with above-average memory usage.
    These shortcomings could be especially evident on machines with significant
non-CPU resources, like storage machines and ML machines. Fortunately, the
typical usage patterns and physical characteristics of each of those machine types
mitigate potential shortcomings. While storage is occasionally directly attached
to compute servers, most storage disks are on separate network-attached storage
machines [6]. These storage machines typically have a low dynamic range, so
most of their power is allocated as idle power. Most ML machines are dedicated


                                       12
machines and frequently all of their dynamic power consumption is allocated to
a single user.

3.4     Reallocating Energy of Internal Services
At Google, many teams build services that other teams use and rely on. For
example, Colossus [24] [24], is the storage system that teams throughout Google
rely on to use and access network-attached storage for their various products.
For carbon footprint accounting, we strive to reallocate the energy and carbon
from these services to their end-users at Google. For example, if Gmail uses
Colossus, our default view of the data is one in which Gmail’s fraction of Colos-
sus energy usage is reallocated from Colossus to Gmail. We also can provide
a view on the data without the reallocation, which can be helpful for service
providers (like the team that builds Colossus) to understand their carbon emis-
sions, but for most users and for external reporting we reallocate usage to the
end-users.
    We perform the reallocation of internal service energy based into two distinct
approaches, depending on the data available. For a few of the largest services,
we have detailed data on the resource usage that their users require. The reallo-
cation of those services is described in 3.4.1. For the long-tail of smaller services,
we have to rely on internal cost data that’s used internally for budgeting and
accounting. The reallocation of these services is described in Section 3.4.2.

3.4.1   Reallocating Energy of Major Shared Services
For major internal shared services, like Colossus, Spanner, and Bigtable, we
have direct information about the resource allocation and resources used on the
service by the users of those services. We use this data to reallocate both idle
power and dynamic power from major shared services to users.
    For idle power, the approach is simple, because resource allocation at Google
is already attributed to users of these major shared services. For large services,
internal resource allocation modelling includes a mapping from shared services
to the underlying base resources used to provide them, so our internal data has
resources allocated directly to the end user instead of the shared service. For
example, 1 Bigtable server and 20 TiB translates into s GCUs, r RAM and
t HDD, so a user consuming 1 Bigtable server and 20 TiB has the additional
resource allocations for s GCUs, r RAM and t HDD in our internal data source.
                                        R
Thus, the resource allocation value rj,C  , for each resource R, cluster C, and
user j described in Section 3.3.1 already includes the reallocation of resource
allocations from shared services to users. For example, if Gmail uses Colossus,
any resource allocations of HDD associated with Gmail’s use of Colossus in any
                                      HDD
cluster C are already included in rGmail,C   . The corresponding idle power is
already attributed to Gmail using the approach in Section 3.3.1.
    On the other hand, dynamic power consumption must be reallocated from
the shared service to its users because the approach in Section 3.3.2 relies on



                                         13
data about task usage which is associated with the shared service team that is
running the compute task.
                R
    Similar to rj,C , let uR
                           j,k,C be user j’s usage of resource R for a shared service
managed by a different user k in cluster C. We reallocate the following fraction
of dynamic power from user k to user j in cluster C:

                                          uGCU
                                            j,k,C
                                γj,k,C = P GCU .                                 (3)
                                           l uk,l,C

    The numerator is user j’s fraction of GCU usage from the service owned and
operated by user k. The denominator is user k’s total GCU usage across all
products and services.
    For Colossus [24, 25], a more complicated approach is required because as
a storage system, much of the resource usage associated with Colossus comes
from hard-disk resources. Thus, for Colussus, we use the usage-power weighted-
resource fraction of GCU, HDD, and SSD. The usage-power associated with each
resource R is defined as c̃R ; it is the average power required for one additional
unit of usage of the resource. This is similar to the power weighting described
above cR , except it is the incremental average power consumption associated
with one unit of resource usage, instead of the incremental busy power associated
with one unit of resource allocation.
    We allocate the following fraction of dynamic power from Colossus, denoted
here as user w, to each user j in each cluster C:

                       c̃HDD uHDD
                              j,w,C + c̃
                                        SSD SSD
                                             uj,w,C + c̃GCU uGCU
                                                             j,w,C
             γj,w,C = P HDD HDD            SSD uSSD + c̃GCU uGCU
                                                                     .           (4)
                         l c̃  uw,l,C +  c̃     w,l,C          w,l,C


3.4.2   Reallocating Energy of Minor Shared Services
Smaller shared services cannot be reallocated using the methodology described
in Section 3.4.1, because we do not have granular data on which resources their
users are consuming when they utilize the shared service. Unlike major shared
services, we do not have direct information about how many resources were con-
sumed by users of these smaller shared services. The methodology described in
the previous Section 3.4.1, is used for approximately 2/3 of shared service energy
consumption, while the methodology in this section is used for approximately
the remaining 1/3 of shared service energy consumption.
    For these smaller shared services, we reallocate power and carbon globally to
users/production groups, proportional to a net cost metric. The net cost metrics
are derived from Google’s Resource Economy, which is a set of teams, policies,
and processes that Google uses to plan and deliver our compute, storage, and
network infrastructure resources. They represent the cost of resources a user
prompted Google to acquire. These are derived metrics, based on consumption
on the consumer side, and capacity data on the inventory side. The data is used
to enable teams at Google to make financial decisions about their own products



                                         14
by exposing economic data about the cost of shared services, compute resources,
and networking.
    For our purposes, we have data on the net cost per production group, shared
service, and day. For production groups that use the shared service, net cost
is positive, whereas for production groups that provide the shared service, net
cost is negative. We also have idle and dynamic power per service and per
production group as outlined in Section 3.3. To reallocate power and carbon
for these services, we first identify the primary provider (a specific production
group or set of production groups) for each shared service. Next, we calculate
the fraction of the shared service provider’s power and carbon that should be
reallocated to each of their service’s users. This accounts for the fact that a few
providers, like Google Cloud’s Compute Engine, provide multiple services. For
each production group, we re-attribute power and carbon proportional to their
net cost of the service. For example, if Google Ads pays $1,000 to Blobstore,
a system for object storage at Google [26], which has total revenue of $10,000
on a particular day, then Ads is allocated 10% of Blobstore’s footprint at every
location on that day.
    Let nSj be the net-cost to user j from shared service S. This number can be
negative if the user j receives revenue from service S. In particular, we say that
user k is the provider of service S if

                                    k = arg min nSi .                                  (5)
                                                 i

User k is the provider of service S if they are the user that receives the most
revenue from Service S. Typically, only one user receives revenue from any
service, so for any service S and any other user i, nSi ≥ 0 and for a single
service provider k, nSk < 0. Furthermore, let n̂k be user k’s non-shared-service
costs. Then, the total costs for user k are T Ck = n̂k + S nSk . Now, let
                                                                   P
T C k = max{|nSk |, T Ck }. We reallocate nSj /T C k of user k’s energy consumption
to user j of service S.4
    This approach has a few desirable properties. First, power is reallocated to
users proportional to their costs associated with each specific service. In carbon
accounting, a cost-based approach is typically less desirable than a resource-
based approach, but we are able to mitigate some of the downsides of the
cost-based approach by applying it to each specific shared service for higher
granularity. Second, in the “balanced” accounting case where a service is used
entirely internally, all of the energy consumption originally allocated to the ser-
vice is reallocated to other internal users. In this case, the services costs equal
its internal revenues, so |nSk | = T CP                          S
                                        k and thus T C k = |nk |. The accounting
                                S              S         S
cost-balance requires that nk = − j̸=k nj , and nk < 0, so in this case the
total fraction of energy reallocated to users is j̸=k nSj /T C k = −nSk /|nSk | = 1.
                                                   P
Third, in the case where a service has costs greater than revenue, a fraction of its
   4 We use T C
                 k in the denominator instead of T Ck to handle edge cases in the internal
accounting whereby a user might have higher internal revenues than costs. This change
ensures that at most 100% of the power originally allocated to user k is reallocated to its
service’s users.


                                            15
power is reallocated to users and some is retained by the shared service provider
k, proportional to the relative fraction of its costs and internal revenues.
    For a working example, please see below. Blue boxes represent shared ser-
vices, red boxes represent users, and black lines represent dollar flows. Software
services (not depicted) are provided by users on the left to users on the right.
Accounting costs flow from users on the right to users on the left. Carbon is
reallocated, based on those accounting costs, to users on the right from users
on the left. A single example user is depicted: Nest, which builds smart-home
hardware and software. Nest is charged (on an accounting-basis) A = nGCE        N est
for its use of the shared service Cloud GCE and B = nVNPest    N
                                                                  for its use of the
shared service Cloud VPN. Compute Engine (itself an internal Google user,
within Google Cloud) manages both of these shared services. Of all of the rev-
enue that Compute Engine receives from various shared services, its net cost in
total is T CComputeEngine , which is its total accounting costs for machines, other
resources, and other shared services, minus its revenues for the services it pro-
vides, e.g. X + Y in Figure 4. Then, in each cluster where Compute Engine has
a footprint, we reallocate A/T CComputeEngine of Compute Engine’s footprint to
Nest for its use of Cloud GCE, and we reallocate B/T CComputeEngine of that
Compute Engine’s footprint to Nest for its use of Cloud VPN.

          Internal Google                   Shared            Google user
          shared service                    services
          supplier


                                            Cloud
                                  X         GCE           A
            Compute
                                                                  Nest
             Engine               Y                       B

                                            Cloud
                                            VPN
               …
                                        Other shared
             Other                      services (not            Other
            suppliers                   provided by              users
                                        Compute Engine)

        Software services
        Costs, in internal accounting
        Carbon emissions



Figure 4: Example of net cost flows in the resource economy used to allocate
carbon of internal Google shared services.


                                                 16
    The diagram names only one user, Nest. In practice, Nest would consume
other shared services provided by Compute Engine in addition to Cloud GCE
and and Cloud VPN and shared services not supplied by Compute Engine.
Additionally, many other users (depicted at bottom) would use the same set of
shared services both supplied by Compute Engine and supplied by other internal
users, but the same logic applies.
    We run this allocation twice to cover situations where Shared Services use
other shared services. This pair of computations occurs after the first round of
reallocation described in Section 3.4.1, so there are three total rounds of Shared
Service reallocation. For example, Blobstore is allocated carbon from Colossus
(in the first round of reallocations described in 3.4.1)). Then, this energy is
reallocated using net cost to Cloud Storage (in the first round of cost-based
reallocation described here). Then, the energy/carbon that Cloud Storage is
assigned from Blobstore is reallocated to Cloud Storage’s internal users during
the second round of reallocation. Additional rounds of allocation would lead to
a more accurate final result, at the cost of additional query resources because
the query joins required to allocate energy for the entire fleet are very large. We
implemented the pipelines with two rounds of allocation because in testing we
observed little change in emissions beyond two rounds of allocation. Additional
rounds of allocation would lead to slightly higher accuracy in allocation but
would require additional pipeline resources and processing time.

3.4.3   Putting it All Together
To get the overall allocated energy consumption per user, we run the following
algorithm to calculate the energy footprint of each user j in each cluster C.

  1. For each user j and cluster C, calculate idle power Ij,C . As mentioned
     above, this naturally encapsulates the reallocation of shared service idle
     power to users because that is done in our upstream data source for re-
     source allocations.
  2. For each user j and cluster C, calculate dynamic power Dj,C .
  3. For each user j and each user k that operates a major shared service
     in each cluster C, calculate γj,k,C using (3) and (4) (the latter, just for
     Colossus, and the former for the remaining services). For each pair and
                                                                 A
     cluster, reallocate γj,k,C Dk,C from user k to user j. Let Pj,C be the new
     total power consumption for user j in cluster C, comprising idle power,
     dynamic power, and reallocated dynamic power.

  4. For each user j and each user k that operates a minor shared service,
                            A
     reallocate nSj /T C k Pk,C                                            B
                                from user k to user j. For any user j let Pj,C
     be the new total power consumption after the reallocation.
  5. Finally, repeat the previous step. For each user j and Beach user k that
     operates a minor shared service, reallocate nSj /T C k Pk,C from user k to


                                        17
      user j. For any user j, let Pj,C be the final total power consumption after
      the reallocation.

    The final result is the energy consumption Pj,C of each user j in every cluster
C, accounting for their machine usage, resource allocation, and usage of dozens
of shared services within Google’s global compute ecosystem.
    A high-level overview of the end-to-end process was shown above in Figure 3.
In addition, the following Figure 5 highlights the energy allocations for Google
Cloud from the overall process. The first column shows the relative breakdown
of machine power and overhead datacenter energy consumption. The overhead
(covered in the next section, 3.5) is applied proportionally to both machine idle
and dynamic power, shown in the second column. The third column shows how
energy is allocated, from top-to-bottom, based on real-time machine utilization
(Section 3.3.2), dedicated machine ownership (Section 3.3.1, and allocation of
shared machine resources (Section 3.3.1. The fourth column shows the real-
location of energy from major and minor shared services 3.4. For simplicity,
we’re only including energy flows that impact Google Cloud and combining all
other internal Google users that provide shared software services to Cloud or use
Google Cloud’s internal software services. In reality, this diagram only shows a
fraction of Google’s overall data center usage.




Figure 5: Sankey diagram showing illustrative energy flows allocated to Cloud
and internal Google users of Google Cloud. This represents, using an illustra-
tive example, a portion of the data center energy consumption at Google that
pertains directly to Google Cloud.


3.5    Incorporating energy overheads and carbon intensity
Now that we have hourly energy consumption allocations to each user in each lo-
cation, we can combine that information with data center energy overheads and
grid carbon emissions intensity values to estimate the “location-based” carbon
footprint of each user in each of Google’s datacenters, which does not account
for any clean energy purchases made by Google.
    Energy overhead refers to the additional energy required to run non-IT
equipment in datacenter. For example, this includes energy required for cooling,


                                        18
lighting, ancillary office equipment, and some power losses. Power Utilization
Effectiveness (PUE) is a metric which captures total power / IT power for a
particular data center. Google has internal information on hourly PUE for its
own datacenter and estimated PUE for third-party data centers we use.
    Carbon intensity is a measure of carbon emissions per unit of electricity
production or consumption. Our methodology uses operational, not life cycle
assessment (LCA) values. Carbon free energy sources such as wind, hydro, or
solar power, produce little if any operational CO2 emissions. Therefore, the
operational carbon intensity of electricity that is generated from carbon-free
energy sources is approximately 0 gCO2 e/kWh.
    To convert the energy consumed by Google’s internal services into an esti-
mate of carbon emissions, we utilize data from Electricity Maps. They provide
carbon intensity data associated with electricity consumption for about 200
zones per hour [27]. A zone is defined as the physical grid on which consumers
and producers are connected and which is controlled by a grid operator.5 Elec-
tricity Maps aggregates data from government and government affiliated sources
(energy ministries, official statistical bureau, etc), transmission or Distribution
System Operators, and utility companies that generate or manage power di-
rectly. The carbon intensity metrics that Google uses measure the carbon in-
tensity that arises from electricity production (Scope 2), and not other life cycle
stages of the plant.
    Figure 6 shows the distribution of carbon intensity values (gCO2 e/kWh)
for all Electricity Maps zones across all hours for the year 2022 . The global
mean is 320.8 gCO2 e/kWh with a standard deviation of 227.5 gCO2 e/kWh. It
is important to note that this distribution does not represent Google’s energy
carbon intensity, as our energy consumption is not equally distributed across all
Electricity Maps zones.
    Electricity Maps estimates the carbon intensity of electricity in a particular
location using a consumption-based accounting method [27], which builds on
flow tracing techniques. The method follows power flow on the transmission
network mapping the paths between the location of generation and the location
of consumption [27]. For example, the methodology shows that Denmark has a
lot of coal production, but during many hours it imports substantial amounts
of hydro and wind energy from Norway and Sweden. In each hour, the method
traces power flows to estimate the generation mix that is used to supply the
power that Denmark consumes, which includes Denmark’s coal generation, but
also the imported wind and hydro from neighboring grids. Then, the method-
ology uses the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s emissions factors
to calculate the carbon intensity associated with that generation mix.
    After hourly energy consumption (kWh) is allocated to each internal service
in each data center cluster, we use PUE data and data from Electricity Maps
to estimate the corresponding carbon emissions (kg CO2 e) associated with the
electricity consumed. To do so we link each data center cluster with the Elec-
tricity Maps zone it resides in. All data center clusters are embedded within,
  5 https://github.com/electricitymaps/electricitymaps-contrib/wiki/What-is-a-zone




                                           19
Figure 6: 2022 hourly carbon intensity distribution for all zones from Electricity
Maps (used in Google’s carbon emissions estimates).


at-most, a single Electricity Maps zone. Then, we multiply power generated per
hour per internal service per data center cluster by its corresponding carbon in-
tensity value per hour per zone. For locations that do not have real-time carbon
intensity data, we use the International Energy Agency (IEA) electricity grid
annual averages.
    More formally:
                  CFj,C,h = (Pj,C,h ) ∗ (P U EC,h ) ∗ (CIZ(C),h )             (6)
   Where:
   • CFj,C,h is the carbon footprint for user j in cluster C in hour h, in kg
     CO2 e.
   • Pj,C,h is the IT energy consumption of user j in cluster C in hour h, in
     MWh. This is calculated according to the approach described in Section
     3.3. Note that in that section we omit the h for simplicity; the calculation
     steps are the same in any hour h
   • P U Ej,C,h is the PUE of cluster C in hour h. This is the ratio of total
     data center energy consumption divided by IT energy consumption.
   • CIz,h is the carbon intensity value in electricity zone z in hour h, in
     kgCO2 e/MWh. The map Z(C) tells us which specific electricity zone
     each physical cluster C is located in.
   Note that these carbon emissions are based on the base carbon intensity of
the corresponding electricity grid; they do not account for Google’s carbon-free


                                        20
energy purchases in a particular region. This means that the carbon emissions
we currently allocate to customers are based on the location-based accounting
standard. We are currently working on an update to also provide customers with
a view of market-based emissions that account for Google’s renewable-energy
purchases, since this is one important way we can reduce data center emissions.
For Google Cloud, from January - December 2023, on average, market-based
emissions was 63% less than location-based emissions, with the ratio of location-
based to market-based emissions varying by Google Cloud location and time of
usage.

3.6    Allocating carbon emissions to customers
Once we have data on electricity consumption and carbon emissions per internal
user, hour, and data center campus, Google allocates electricity and carbon
emissions from a Google Cloud product to its multiple products (SKUs) and to
external customers. We illustrate this in Figure 7:




Figure 7: High-level overview of allocation of carbon from internal users that
provide the resources for Google Cloud products to external Google Cloud cus-
tomers.

     Each SKU (“stock keeping unit”) is mapped to a Google Cloud product, and
we connect each Google Cloud product to an internal user that provides the
resources for that product. We then estimate the hourly energy for each service
in each location. Next, we use revenue data to allocate energy proportional to
list prices for different SKUs within a product. Finally, we add carbon intensity
information per Google Cloud product and Cloud region.




                                       21
3.6.1     Using Revenue Data to Allocate Electricity to SKUs within
          Internal Services
For each product, we conduct the following procedure. Let T be a Google Cloud
product offered by user j, such as Compute Engine or BigQuery. User j might
offer multiple Google Cloud products. Furthermore, let Kj be the set of SKUs
offered by user j across all of its Google Cloud products.

    • Calculate
           P the total global electricity consumption for the internal user,
      Pj = C,h Pj,C,h .
    • Calculate total usage for each SKU, Us , for each SKU offered by the
      internal user j.6 Each SKU has a specific unit to measure its usage.
      Examples include vCPU*hour for Compute Engine SKUs or GiB*month
      for Cloud Storage SKUs. The total usage Us represents the sum of usage
      from all users, in all regions, for the same time period over which Pj is
      calculated.
    • Get the list price for each SKU, Cs . We do not include Commitment
      SKUs, Committed Use Discounts, or Sustained Use Discounts in our mea-
      surement of Cs , as we only want to consider list price to fairly allocate
      energy to end-customers.
    • We calculate energy per usage unit for each SKU by a formula which en-
      sures that the energy consumption/usage unit is proportional across SKUs
      to price/usage unit, while also ensuring that the total energy consump-
      tion sums appropriately to the total energy consumption for the internal
      service provider. The equation for calculating allocated energy per usage
      unit for a SKU, Xs is:

                                  1   U ∗ Cs          P j Cs
                       Xs = Pj      P s           =P
                                  Us v∈Kj Uv ∗ Cv   v∈Kj Uv ∗ Cv
                                                                 P
        In this way, the energy usage sums appropriately, i.e. s∈Kj Us ∗Xs = Pj .
        Additionally, energy per usage unit is proportional to list prices for any
                        Xs
        pair of SKUs, X      = CCs′ for any s, s′ , provided by the same service (i.e.
                          s′     s
        Compute Engine).

   Consider a simple example below: Google Cloud only offers two SKUs for
purchase, SKU A and SKU B. Assume that 1 unit of SKU A costs $28 and 1
unit of SKU B costs $16 (i.e. one unit of SKU A costs 1.75 times more than one
unit of SKU B). Our methodology allocates 1.75 times more energy per unit of
usage to SKU A than to SKU B. From the usage and cost data, we have the
blue data in Table 1. We calculate the numbers in red cells, first adjusting the
   6 Within each service are a list of SKUs, which are distinct offerings for which customers are

charged. Examples include BigQuery BI Engine and BigQuery Storage API, both of which
are available to purchase for the BigQuery Service.



                                               22
total energy estimates to align with the overall energy consumption (30 Wh),
and then calculating the final adjusted energy/unit figures.

             Quantity                                           Est. Energy /
   SKU                      Normalized Cost     Est. Energy
           (SKU Units)                                           SKU Unit
    A          15                 1.75             16 Wh          1.62 Wh
    B          10                  1               14 Wh          0.92 Wh
   Total                                           30 Wh

Table 1: Example of allocation of energy from Google Cloud products to SKUs.

    The methodology solves for X = 0.92 from the following equation: 10 ∗ 1.75 ∗
X + 15 ∗ 1 ∗ X = 30, and the ratio of estimated energy/unit across the two SKUs
is 1.75 (1.62/0.92), which is equal to the ratio of the list price between the two
SKUs. One limitation of this approach is that customers do not receive a signal
about how switching from SKU A to SKU B can reduce their actual emissions,
but rather their allocated emissions based on list prices. For example, if SKU A
and SKU B actually consume the same amount of electricity and are in the same
Google Cloud region, SKU A might have a 20% lower allocated carbon footprint
than SKU B, just because SKU A has a 20% lower list price than SKU B. This
discrepancy does not inform the customer about the actual relative footprint
of SKU A and SKU B. The methodology was designed such that we could use
billing data to apply the same methodology across all Google Cloud products,
but future work could consider physical differences in the service stack, such
as use of GCU, RAM, SSD, and HHD resources at the SKU-level, along with
prices as factors for allocating emissions.

3.6.2   Google Cloud Products’ Carbon Footprint Per Cloud Region
Many Cloud products and specific SKUs are offered in multiple Cloud Regions.
We estimate emissions of each SKU and service per region because this is the
level at which Google Cloud customers can design their Cloud architecture. If
customers are interested in updating their Cloud architecture to optimize for
lowering their location-based emissions, one of the most effective ways to do this
is to move their workload for a given service to a lower-carbon region.
    How do we handle resource usage in different locations than customer work-
loads? Some Cloud products use resources in places that are not exactly equiv-
alent to their customers’ footprint. For example, a product might run back-end
analysis or testing in a different cluster with a lower carbon footprint than their
customers’ workloads. The design decisions we made are meant to address this.
First, we allocate energy globally and adjust for carbon intensity by region,
rather than allocating carbon emissions directly by region. This accounts for
the fact that a service might have overhead resources or supporting resources
in just one location–we want to make sure that overhead energy consumption
gets allocated to all customers, not just those in the particular region where the
overhead resources are located. Second, we use an adjustment term to capture


                                         23
overhead to ensure that the total carbon emissions of the service are allocated
to users.
    We estimate emissions of each SKU per Cloud Region r according to the
following protocol. First, for any set of Google Cloud products provided by
internal Google user j, we estimate the net carbon intensity (accounting also
for differences in PUE and grid carbon intensity) of the product’s offerings in
each Cloud Region,                      P
                                          h,C∈r CFj,C,h
                               Cj,r = P
                                           h,C∈r Pj,C,h
.
    A natural assumption is that the carbon emissions per usage unit of any
SKU s offered in region r is Cj,r Xs . We make a slight adjustment to ensure
that the total carbon emissions allocated across all SKUs adds up to the total
internally measured carbon footprint. Thus, let C s,r be the carbon intensity
per usage unit of a SKU s that is offered by internal user j in region r.
    Let Us,r be the usage of SKU s in the particular region r. First, we cal-
culate
P       the total global electricity consumption for the internal user, CFj =
   C,h CF j,C,h . Then, to find C s,r , we solve a “carbon balance” equation:
                         X                          X
                CFj =            C s,r Xs Us,r =            αCj,r Xs Us,r
                        r,s∈Kj                     r,s∈Kj

                        P
by setting α = CFj /( r,s∈Kj Cj,r Xs Us,r ), and therefore C s,r = αCj,r . The
variable α just serves as a re-weighting term to ensure that the total carbon
footprint attributed to internal user j gets fully allocated to the SKUs it has
provided to customers. This is done because some Cloud products use resources
in places that are not exactly equivalent to their customers’ footprint. Since we
employ a carbon accounting methodology, the α terms ensures that the total
carbon footprint that each internal user j is responsible for (Compute Engine for
example) equals the total carbon footprint that are reported to Cloud customers.

3.6.3   Final Allocation to End Customers
Finally, we calculate the emissions allocated to each Google Cloud billing ac-
count b for each external Google Cloud Product in each Google Could region.
The following is done on a monthly basis. As before, let T be a particular
Google Cloud product. Let KT be the set of SKUs included in product T . Let
Us,r,b be the usage of SKU s in region r measured for Google Cloud billing
account b on the particular day. Then, customer b’s allocated carbon footprint
for product T in region r is given by
                                    X
                         CFb,T,r =       βC s,r Xs Us,r,b .
                                      s∈KT

   Similarly to how we’ve defined α, β is an overhead term to ensure all
ofPGoogle Cloud’s
            P     emissions get allocated to customers. Specifically, β =
( j CFj )/( s∈T,r C s,r Xs Us,r ). This allows us to ensure that any overhead


                                          24
that’s not directly allocated to customers (e.g. machines that are held by a
generic internal user for other Cloud teams to use as necessary) is allocated to
customers.
   This gives us an estimate of total carbon emissions per billing account, bro-
ken down by location and by Google Cloud product. We present end-customers
with an estimate of their total emissions per-product, per-region, per-month.


4     Future work and discussion
We developed this approach with scale in mind: it was essential to provide a
fair, reasonable, Google-wide allocation of carbon emissions to all Google teams,
products, and customers. This approach necessitated some important trade-
offs. In particular, the approach we developed is an allocation-based accounting
approach. We could improve aspects of the existing allocation, or consider
more substantial departures from the existing allocation method to produce
causal estimates of carbon emissions. Here are some examples of potential
improvements:
    • For example, for the customer-allocation decisions that currently use eco-
      nomic factors, like cost or revenue (e.g. those described in Section 3.6), we
      could improve our data collection to use physical allocation instead, re-
      placing revenue-based allocations with more specific knowledge of physical
      resource requirements and their energy use.
    • We could improve the assumptions we use in physical allocations. For ex-
      ample, we currently use GCU usage to allocate dynamic power usage when
      multiple users share a single machine. In reality, users with above-average
      memory usage are probably responsible for more energy consumption. We
      could test the extent to which memory usage impacts overall machine en-
      ergy consumption and augment the model to consider GCU usage and
      memory usage simultaneously to allocate dynamic power on shared ma-
      chines.
    • We could try to derive a more directly causal estimate of carbon emissions.
      In some cases, estimating causal impacts could complement the accounting
      and reporting-focused approach we outlined here.
    • We could build validation tools based on direct measurement of energy
      consumption of specific SKUs, when possible. This would allow us to
      directly validate potential improvements to allocation methodologies by
      comparing their accuracy for some SKUs.
The allocations presented here are a useful starting point, but we know that
future improvements in any of these directions will make it easier to identify
and suggest software optimization to reduce carbon emissions.
    The work described here focuses on Scope 2 carbon emissions–those arising
from purchased energy (electricity) in data centers. As described in [10], as elec-
tricity grids in data center locations become cleaner, and as Cloud providers like


                                        25
Google continue to buy more hourly-matched carbon-free energy, the electricity-
related emissions associated with a unit of data center compute will continue
to shrink. As that happens, the manufacturing emissions associated with data
center hardware will become an increasingly important segment of data center
emissions. Future work should focus on more accurately measuring data center
hardware manufacturing emissions and allocating those emissions to internal
users and external Cloud customers. These improvements will help spread the
benefits of accurate accounting and measurement to an increasingly critical seg-
ment of data center emissions.
    Future work will also add new data to enable, first, enhanced reporting
using the market-based emissions standard, and, later, improved data to en-
able carbon-reduction efforts. First, we will launch market-based emissions
reporting to Cloud customers, which accounts for Google’s carbon-free energy
procurement by matching Google’s procurement to relevant data centers loads
according to GHGP standards. While the Cloud Carbon footprint location-
based metrics use hourly emissions factors, market-based metrics will use annual
greenhouse gas emissions factors to be consistent with Google’s company-wide
annual Scope 2 emissions accounting methodology. For this reason, we an-
ticipate that customers will use market-based metrics primarily for reporting
purposes. In the longer term, we hope to create more tools to help customers
optimize their Google Cloud architecture to reduce electricity consumption and
carbon emissions. We hope to build metrics and measurement tools, based on
customer-specific use cases, that are most helpful for directing actions to reduce
carbon emissions.


References
 [1] Google.         Google   2023   environmental   report,   2024.
     URL            https://www.gstatic.com/gumdrop/sustainability/
     google-2023-environmental-report.pdf.
 [2] Google. Aiming to achieve net-zero emissions and 24/7 carbon-free en-
     ergy. URL https://sustainability.google/operating-sustainably/
     net-zero-carbon/.

 [3] Google. Google: 24/7 carbon-free energy by 2030, 2022. URL https:
     //www.google.com/about/datacenters/cleanenergy/.
 [4] Ana Radovanović, Ross Koningstein, Ian Schneider, Bokan Chen, Alexan-
     dre Duarte, Binz Roy, Diyue Xiao, Maya Haridasan, Patrick Hung, Nick
     Care, et al. Carbon-aware computing for datacenters. IEEE Transactions
     on Power Systems, 38(2):1270–1280, 2022.
 [5] Ross Koningstein. We now do more computing where there’s cleaner
     energy, 2021.    URL https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/
     sustainability/carbon-aware-computing-location/.


                                       26
 [6] Luiz André Barroso, Urs Hölzle, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan. The
     datacenter as a computer: Designing warehouse-scale machines. Springer
     Nature, 2019.
 [7] World Resources Institute and WBSCD.      Corporate value chain
     (scope 3) accounting and reporting standard, supplement to the
     ghg protocol corporate accounting and reporting standard, 2021.
     URL     https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/
     Corporate-Value-Chain-Accounting-Reporing-Standard_041613_2.
     pdf.
 [8] IEA. Electricity 2024, 2024.       URL https://www.iea.org/reports/
     electricity-2024.
 [9] Jacob LaRiviere, Gavin Mccormick, and Sho Kawano. How better account-
     ing can more cheaply reduce carbon emissions. Policy Brief, 4, 2016.
[10] Udit Gupta, Young Geun Kim, Sylvia Lee, Jordan Tse, Hsien-Hsin S Lee,
     Gu-Yeon Wei, David Brooks, and Carole-Jean Wu. Chasing carbon: The
     elusive environmental footprint of computing. In 2021 IEEE International
     Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages
     854–867. IEEE, 2021.
[11] Rong He, Le Luo, Abul Shamsuddin, and Qingliang Tang. Corporate car-
     bon accounting: A literature review of carbon accounting research from
     the Kyoto Protocol to the Paris Agreement. Accounting & Finance, 62(1):
     261–298, 2022.
[12] Climate Disclosure Product. CDP technical note: Relevance of scope 3
     categories by sector, 2022.

[13] Matthew Brander, Andreas GF Hoepner, Joeri Rogelj, Tushar Saini, and
     Fabiola Schneider. Corporate carbon disclosure: A critical review. Available
     at SSRN 4429430, 2023.
[14] Roy Schwartz, Jesse Dodge, Noah A Smith, and Oren Etzioni. Green AI.
     Communications of the ACM, 63(12):54–63, 2020.

[15] Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum.         Energy
     and policy considerations for deep learning in NLP. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1906.02243, 2019.
[16] Jesse Dodge, Taylor Prewitt, Remi Tachet des Combes, Erika Odmark,
     Roy Schwartz, Emma Strubell, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Noah A Smith,
     Nicole DeCario, and Will Buchanan. Measuring the carbon intensity of
     AI in cloud instances. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on
     Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 1877–1894, 2022.




                                       27
[17] David Patterson, Joseph Gonzalez, Quoc Le, Chen Liang, Lluis-Miquel
     Munguia, Daniel Rothchild, David So, Maud Texier, and Jeff Dean.
     Carbon emissions and large neural network training. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2104.10350, 2021.
[18] Avita Katal, Susheela Dahiya, and Tanupriya Choudhury. Energy efficiency
     in cloud computing data centers: a survey on software technologies. Cluster
     Computing, 26(3):1845–1875, 2023.
[19] Chen Liang, Dave Patterson, David Richard So, Jeff Dean, Lluis-Miquel
     Munguia, Maud Texier, and Quoc V Le. The carbon footprint of machine
     learning training will level out and then reduce, 2022.

[20] Google. Carbon footprint reporting methodology, 2023. URL https://
     cloud.google.com/carbon-footprint/docs/methodology.
[21] Abhishek Verma, Luis Pedrosa, Madhukar Korupolu, David Oppenheimer,
     Eric Tune, and John Wilkes. Large-scale cluster management at google
     with borg. In Proceedings of the tenth european conference on computer
     systems, pages 1–17, 2015.
[22] Sundar Dev, David Lo, Liqun Cheng, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan.
     Autonomous warehouse-scale computers. In 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design
     Automation Conference (DAC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2020.

[23] Xiaobo Fan, Wolf-Dietrich Weber, and Luiz Andre Barroso. Power provi-
     sioning for a warehouse-sized computer. ACM SIGARCH computer archi-
     tecture news, 35(2):13–23, 2007.
[24] Google.       Colossus   under  the   hood:     a   peek into
     Google’s scalable storage system,   2021.      URL https://
     cloud.google.com/blog/products/storage-data-transfer/
     a-peek-behind-colossus-googles-file-system.
[25] Denis Serenyi. Cluster-level storage at Google. In Keynote at the 2nd
     Joint International Workshop on Parallel Data Storage and Data Intensive
     Scalable Intensive Computing Systems, 2017.

[26] Google Cloud. What is object storage? URL https://cloud.google.
     com/learn/what-is-object-storage#section-1.
[27] Bo Tranberg, Olivier Corradi, Bruno Lajoie, Thomas Gibon, Iain Staffell,
     and Gorm Bruun Andresen. Real-time carbon accounting method for the
     European electricity markets. Energy Strategy Reviews, 26:100367, 2019.




                                      28
