Business / Technical Brief




Oracle Cloud Infrastructure:
Technical Carbon Calculation
Guidance to Support Customer
Requests on Sustainability
Reporting

OCI Data Center Engineering | Sustainability Team

February 2023, Version 1.0
Copyright © 2023, Oracle and/or its affiliates
Public




1 Business / Technical Brief / Oracle Cloud Infrastructure: Technical Carbon Calculation Guidance to Support Customer Requests on Sustainability
Reporting / Version 1.0
    Copyright © 2023, Oracle and/or its affiliates / Public
Purpose statement
This document provides technical guidance on how to calculate Oracle Cloud
related carbon emissions for customer requests on sustainability reporting.

Disclaimer
This document in any form, software or printed matter, contains proprietary
information that is the exclusive property of Oracle. Your access to and use of
this confidential material is subject to the terms and conditions of your Oracle
software license and service agreement, which has been executed and with
which you agree to comply. This document and information contained herein
may not be disclosed, copied, reproduced or distributed to anyone outside
Oracle without prior written consent of Oracle. This document is not part of your
license agreement nor can it be incorporated into any contractual agreement
with Oracle or its subsidiaries or affiliates.

This document is for informational purposes only and is intended solely to assist
you in planning for the implementation and upgrade of the product features
described. It is not a commitment to deliver any material, code, or functionality,
and should not be relied upon in making purchasing decisions. The
development, release, and timing of any features or functionality described in
this document remains at the sole discretion of Oracle. Due to the nature of the
product architecture, it may not be possible to safely include all features
described in this document without risking significant destabilization of the code.




2 Business / Technical Brief / Oracle Cloud Infrastructure: Technical Carbon Calculation Guidance to Support Customer Requests on Sustainability
Reporting / Version 1.0
    Copyright © 2023, Oracle and/or its affiliates / Public
Table of contents

Purpose statement                                                                                      2
Disclaimer                                                                                             2
Our Commitment                                                                                         4
Carbon Footprint Context                                                                               4
Carbon Footprint Customer Calculation                                                                  5
Calculation Methodology                                                                                5
Framework Alignment                                                                                    6
References                                                                                             6




3 Business / Technical Brief / Oracle Cloud Infrastructure: Technical Carbon Calculation Guidance to Support Customer Requests on Sustainability
Reporting / Version 1.0
    Copyright © 2023, Oracle and/or its affiliates / Public
                                                                                                                     Our sustainability
Our Commitment                                                                                                       commitment to our customers

                                                                                                                     “Oracle is committed to
Oracle is building a more sustainable future and using technology as a force                                         embedding sustainability across
for good.                                                                                                            our enterprise and delivering
                                                                                                                     innovative cloud technology to
Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (OCI) endeavors to lead the way with our cloud                                           accelerate meaningful change.”
regions. We challenge ourselves to address climate change and create a more                                          - Safra Catz, CEO.
circular economy. Oracle Cloud enables our customers to support their
sustainable computing goals, while also achieving other benefits of the cloud,
including security, reliability, and performance.

Oracle is setting the bar for environmental progress with goals that apply to our
cloud regions:

     •      Carbon Neutral by 2025 including 100% renewable energy use for
            Oracle Cloud and Oracle operations,
     •      Net Zero by 2050 as aligned to the Exponential Roadmap Initiative, and
     •      50% reduction in total emissions by 2030 relative to a 2020 baseline.

Carbon Footprint Context
Emissions accounting requires understanding that the same emissions that are
Scope 1 or Scope 2 for one business are accounted as Scope 3 for another or
may be deemed out of scope all together. The Greenhouse Gas Protocol (TGGP)
allows for flexibility when determining how to classify a corporation’s emissions
for voluntary carbon reporting.




Figure 1. Carbon emissions by scope for each participate in the Cloud value chain. Note, in corporate
greenhouse gas accounting companies may opt to include upstream and downstream impacts one
step removed from their value chain partners within their Scope 3 boundaries, or they may deem them
out of scope and thus not applicable.

Oracle Cloud Infrastructure, for example, generates Scope 1, 2, and 3 emissions
for Oracle Corporation, but for our customers who purchase our services, the
allotted portion of these emissions qualifies as their Scope 3 emissions. The
graphic depicts the life-cycle emissions associated with our value chain, our own
activities, and our Oracle Cloud customers. Customers can estimate their


4 Business / Technical Brief / Oracle Cloud Infrastructure: Technical Carbon Calculation Guidance to Support Customer Requests on Sustainability
Reporting / Version 1.0
    Copyright © 2023, Oracle and/or its affiliates / Public
emissions using use emission factors from supplier emissions data as reported
in annual sustainability reports and surveys such as CDP Climate Change.

Carbon associated with OCI cloud region operations is comprised of Scope 1 –
direct emissions 1 associated with onsite emissions at the cloud regions and
Scope 2 – indirect emissions associated with the production of electricity
consumed by our cloud regions. Scope 2 emissions are reported in two forms:
location-based Scope 2 emissions which account for the geographic location of
our sites and inherent grid energy mix; and market-based Scope 2 emissions
which account for the specific energy supply contracts in place and the specific
energy suppliers’ emissions factors which can be zeroed out from the purchase
of high-quality renewable energy 2. OCI’s Scope 1 and 2 emissions contribute
to our customers’ Scope 3 value chain emissions.




Figure 2. Sources of Oracle Cloud data center operational emissions.


Carbon Footprint Customer Calculation
To enhance transparency around the impact of our Oracle Cloud regions, we
publish revenue-based carbon emissions factors to enable our customers to
estimate their Scope 3 emissions across all Oracle products and services.

The formula for calculating carbon emissions is given below:




Using Oracle’s intensity metrics, customers can easily estimate their Scope 3
emissions using their monthly invoices. For the most current emissions factors,
see Oracle’s Clean Cloud OCI Data Sheet.

Calculation Methodology
Oracle’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory methodology is governed by the application
of the Greenhouse Gas Protocol (TGGP) standards and guidance from CDP.
Oracle’s emissions are externally assured by a third party using the ISO14064-3
greenhouse gas verification standard. Understanding that not every customer
reports the same way, we value the importance of data and transparency. More
information and details related to emissions and our full CDP Climate Change
Response and program details are found on our website:
www.oracle.com/sustainability.
5 Business / Technical Brief / Oracle Cloud Infrastructure: Technical Carbon Calculation Guidance to Support Customer Requests on Sustainability
Reporting / Version 1.0
    Copyright © 2023, Oracle and/or its affiliates / Public
Framework Alignment




References
Oracle publishes social impact and environmental information in a variety of locations:

      •      Oracle CDP Climate Change Survey: https://www.oracle.com/a/ocom/docs/cdp-climate-change-
             questionnaire-2022.pdf
      •      Oracle Clean Cloud Website: https://www.oracle.com/sustainability/green-cloud/
      •      Oracle Clean Cloud OCI Data Sheet: https://www.oracle.com/a/ocom/docs/corporate/citizenship/clean-
             cloud-oci.pdf
      •      Oracle Environmental Sustainability Website: www.oracle.com/sustainability
      •      Oracle ESG Hub: https://www.oracle.com/social-impact/esg-hub/
      •      Oracle Social Impact Report Website: https://www.oracle.com/corporate/citizenship/
      •      Oracle Social Impact Datasheet: https://www.oracle.com/a/ocom/docs/corporate/citizenship/ccr-
             datasheet.pdf




Connect with us

Call +1.800.ORACLE1 or visit oracle.com. Outside North America, find your local office at: oracle.com/contact.

      blogs.oracle.com                         facebook.com/oracle                           twitter.com/oracle


Copyright © 2023, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. This document is       Oracle and Java are registered trademarks of Oracle and/or its affiliates. Other names may be
provided for information purposes only, and the contents hereof are subject to change       trademarks of their respective owners.
without notice. This document is not warranted to be error-free, nor subject to any other
                                                                                            Intel and Intel Xeon are trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation. All SPARC
warranties or conditions, whether expressed orally or implied in law, including implied
                                                                                            trademarks are used under license and are trademarks or registered trademarks of SPARC
warranties and conditions of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. We
                                                                                            International, Inc. AMD, Opteron, the AMD logo, and the AMD Opteron logo are trademarks or
specifically disclaim any liability with respect to this document, and no contractual
                                                                                            registered trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices. UNIX is a registered trademark of The Open
obligations are formed either directly or indirectly by this document. This document
                                                                                            Group. 0120
may not be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, for any purpose, without our prior written permission.                          Disclaimer: If you are unsure whether your data sheet needs a disclaimer, read the revenue
                                                                                            recognition policy. If you have further questions about your content and the disclaimer
This device has not been authorized as required by the rules of the Federal
                                                                                            requirements, e-mail REVREC_US@oracle.com.
Communications Commission. This device is not, and may not be, offered for sale or
lease, or sold or leased, until authorization is obtained.




6 Business / Technical Brief / Oracle Cloud Infrastructure: Technical Carbon Calculation Guidance to Support Customer Requests on Sustainability
Reporting / Version 1.0
     Copyright © 2023, Oracle and/or its affiliates / Public
