                        OVHcloud’s carbon calculator methodology

Digital technology is playing an increasingly important role at the heart of our professional and personal lives. The
democratization of cloud services accompanying this explosion in usage is contributing more and more to the
digitization of all economic sectors, creating a cycle of continuous improvement and change.


For over 20 years, OVHcloud has been innovating to make the cloud more sustainable by reducing the impact of its
datacenters and servers and using resources sparingly.


Maintaining this innovation momentum, OVHcloud is now offering a carbon calculator designed to provide an
estimation of greenhouse gas emissions. It stands out as the first to offer a transparent and exhaustive approach.
Allowing OVHcloud customers to understand their carbon footprint, the results linked to their cloud usage are broken
down into 3 emission categories:


The manufacturing phase: upstream greenhouse gas emissions linked to the purchase and assembly of components
of the server(s);
The use phase: emissions linked to electricity consumption of the server(s);
Other emissions: other emissions such as freight or the impact induced by employees - known as «operations».


IJO, a consultancy specializing in green IT, and Cost House, a consultancy specializing in economic performance, have
been commissioned to carry out a methodological review of the OVHcloud carbon footprint simulator using the Bilan
Carbone® method. You will find here the certification letter for the carbon footprint calculator, certified as compliant
with the Bilan Carbone® method, meeting the requirements of the GHG Protocol and, moreover, adapted to OVHcloud's
activities, presenting a high level of accuracy.


Before displaying this calculator, and in order to carry out this project successfully, a strict methodology has been
established. We present here a short version of it.




                                                           1
  I.    Methodology

              1. OVHcloud’s methodological choices

                    a. Commitment in providing transparent, comprehensive, and reliable information

OVHcloud’s commitment in communicating carbon-related information to its customers begins with the calculation
of the GHG (Greenhouse Gas) emissions associated with all the delivered services. OVHcloud develops an approach
that embraces all products of its catalog in order to provide a complete carbon footprint to each client. Every service
delivered has its own features and addresses specific customer needs. Therefore, developing calculations is a process
that OVHcloud handles thoroughly in a methodical and structured way, embraced in overall sustainability roadmap.


First of all, as recommended by the highest standards in GHG accounting, OVHcloud also includes in this tool, emissions
related to OVHcloud operations. The aim here is to provide trustworthy results and highlight commitment to reducing
all of OVHcloud emissions. Details about actions on this matter can be found in OVHcloud yearly carbon assessment.


The choice made by OVHcloud is to communicate to the customers all of the emissions from the three scopes of carbon
reporting (scope 1 – direct emissions, scope 2 and 3 – indirect emissions). Transparency towards customers is key, and
therefore it is OVHcloud responsibility to provide a complete carbon footprint by categories to give to the clients all the
elements to monitor and reduce the impacts of the products they use.


OVHcloud activities’ main sources of GHG emissions are the production of servers (22 % in 2023) and the supply of
electricity (45 % in 2023) – mainly for the data centers. The rest of the scopes of emissions account in total for 33 %. To
enable customers to actually reduce their emissions, and in accordance with OVHcloud transparency values, the
carbon calculator model shows a carbon footprint allocated over three pillars: Manufacturing / Electricity / Operations
(Figure 1).




                                                            2
             Figure 1. Perimeters for assessing the GHG carbon emissions of Cloud services (Source: OVHcloud)



                                                              Key insights
                                3 pillars have been chosen to show the environmental impacts:
                                               Manufacturing, Electricity, Operations


                       b. Development process and selection of products addressed

OVHcloud offers a large range of services from computing to data storage or web hosting. This extensive catalog is a
challenge when addressing the allocation of GHG emissions. Consequently, and with the aim of designing a coherent
and reliable approach, we decided to address five major products:
    •    Baremetal dedicated servers (first available version: summer 2023)
    •    Hosted Private Cloud (first available version: November 2023)
    •    Public Cloud – Compute
    •    Public Cloud – Object Storage
    •    Web Hosting


As published in the Fiscal Year 2021 Annual Results1, the revenues of these products account for about 74 % of the
global revenues.


The environmental display tool will include the precise calculation of the emissions related to these products in all of
locations. For the first version of the tool, a complete methodology for Baremetal dedicated servers has been
developed as presented below.




1
 Fiscal Year 2021 Annual Results are available on OVHcloud corporate website: https://corporate.ovhcloud.com/en/investor-relations/financial-
results-2021/
                                                                     3
           2. General approach for calculating customer carbon footprint

Developing a model to assess the environmental impacts of products and manage their allocation to each customer
requires being able to evaluate the carbon footprint of each Baremetal server installed in OVHcloud’s data centers that
is used for the operation of customer services. In the calculation model developed by OVHcloud and presented in this
paper, the estimation of the servers-related carbon emissions is a key enabler for the rest of the process, including
spreading the emissions over the different services used by the customers, in accordance with the configuration and
the location of the servers.


GHG emission calculation is made at the server level and includes all the materials, teams and activities required for
operating the building and managing the servers. Furthermore, as it is explained in the sections below, the
methodology differentiates two different types of products: dedicated services and mutualized ones (more precisions
are given in the sections “Methods for allocating dedicated server’s carbon footprint”). The global approach explained
and specified in this paper is summarized in Figure 2.




                    Figure 2. Diagram of the global approach chosen for carbon footprint assessment



The three pillars (Manufacturing, Electricity and Operations) of OVHcloud carbon calculator model also reflect three
different approaches to calculate carbon footprints. One is due to on-site activities of manufacturing which require
various materials; the second is directly linked to the location of OVHcloud’s buildings, the available energy sources
and OVHcloud’s efforts towards the use of low-carbon energy; and the last one gathers a large range of emission
sources to allocate to each customer. This section aims at providing key elements on the three approaches developed
by OVHcloud to assess customer related carbon footprint.




                                                           4
           3. Approach used for the calculation of the carbon footprint by server according to three
              natures of emissions

                   a. Manufacturing

As it represents 22 % of the global carbon assessment of the company, the manufacturing of the servers (including
upstream emissions of the hardware manufacturing) used in OVHcloud data centers is central in the calculation of the
carbon footprint for the services provided to customers. OVHcloud assembles all of the servers we use and their cooling
system, with various configurations. The wide range of configurations, designed for the different use cases of the
customers, requires a strong methodology to be able to evaluate the carbon footprint of every server used in each data
center.
OVHcloud has indeed implemented high standards to assemble and disassemble servers. Therefore, components have
different use phases. This integrated model enables OVHcloud to provide price competitive services with a high level
of reliability while minimizing the associated environmental impacts.




                         Figure 3. Explaining picture of the composition of an OVHcloud server



The carbon impact of producing a server predominantly comes from the manufacturing of a few main types of
components such as CPU, GPU, RAM, HDD/SDD, motherboard and power supply (Figure 3). Therefore, it was important
to develop a model that reflect the real impacts and therefore that is based on the physical configuration of the
machine. As OVHcloud assemble every server, the model has to be fed by reliable and regularly updated data.




                                                           5
                                      Table 1. GHG footprint of component (Source: IJO)

          Component type                    Unit                     Emission factor         Mark-up for doubt
         Rack size                       1U / 2U / 3U             200 / 250 / 350 kgCO2eq
         CPU size               Number of physical cores         1,5 kgCO2eq/physical core
         RAM size                         Giga byte                  2 kgCO2eq/Gbyte                60 %
         SSD size                         Tera byte                 60 kgCO2eq/Tbyte
         HDD size                         Tera byte                 25 kgCO2eq/Tbyte


A calculation model based on the configuration of a server has been developed to assess the carbon footprint of every
physical host. By combining recent data from the scientific literature, with information communicated by IT
component manufacturers of which some of suppliers, the model succeeds to spread OVHcloud’s impact over all the
servers including primary manufacturing (Table 1). Hence, a single but evolving model enables providing precise
personalized carbon footprint for every physical machine.


                                                        Key insights
The model developed to assess GHG emissions associated to the production of every server relies on two key points:
    • The configuration of the machines, especially the CPU, RAM and hard disks, whether HDD or SDD,
    • The expected lifespan.


                     b. Electricity

Operating a physical server requires the mobilization of many other IT materials and infrastructure which must be
considered in the evaluation on the environmental impacts. A diagram summarizing the main sources of power
consumption considered for estimating the direct and indirect consumptions of a server is provided in Figure 4.




                             Figure 4. Main power consumptions sources for operating a server



OVHcloud achieves to maintain low carbon emissions thanks to the location of many data centers in countries where
the GHG intensity of the electricity mix is relatively low such as France or Canada. This leads to globally low CUE (Carbon

                                                             6
Usage Effectiveness). Also, OVHcloud achieves good results in PUE (Power Usage Effectiveness) and WUE (Water Usage
Effectiveness) with the implementation of its own cooling technologies (Table 2). When we are not able to measure the
PUE, we use the average PUE FY2023 of 1.29.
                                   Table 2. GHG intensity of national electricity mix (October 2023)

                                                                                               Market-based –
                                         Source of Location-based                                                              WUE
    Datacenter                                                                             Electricity emissions        PUE
                                         Electrical Emission Factor                                                            (l/kWh)
                                                                                                   (kg CO2e/kWh)

                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).
Beauharnois    BHS                                                                                    0,0250            1,24    1,00
                      https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - Québec - 2022
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).                      Refer to location based
Erith          ERI                                                                                                      1,25    0,20
                      https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - Great Britain - 2022   electrical emission factor
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).
Gravelines     GRA                                                                                    0,0356            1,22    0,13
                      https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - France - 2022
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).                      Refer to location based
Hauts de France HDF                                                                                                      -        -
                      https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - France - 2022          electrical emission factor
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).
                                                                                           Refer to location based
Hillsboro      HIL https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - Portland General                                       1,46    0,93
                                                                                           electrical emission factor
                      Electric Company - 2022
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).
Limburg        LIM                                                                                    0,0250            1,31    0,27
                      https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - Germany - 2022
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).                      Refer to location based
Mumbai         MUM                                                                                                       -        -
                      https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - Western India - 2022 electrical emission factor
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).
Roubaix        RBX                                                                                    0,0356            1,35    0,30
                      https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - France - 2022
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).                      Refer to location based
Singapore      SGP                                                                                                       -        -
                      https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - Singapore - 2022       electrical emission factor
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).
Strasbourg     SBG                                                                                    0,0356            1,25    0,57
                      https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - France - 2022
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).
                                                                                           Refer to location based
Sydney         SYD https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - New South Wales -                                       -        -
                                                                                           electrical emission factor
                      2022
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).
                                                                                           Refer to location based
Vint Hill      VIN https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - PJM Interconnection,                                   1,37    0,04
                                                                                           electrical emission factor
                      Llc - 2022
                      Electricity Maps - Data Portal. (2023, July 1).
Warsaw         WAW                                                                                    0,0126            1,32    0,36
                      https://www.electricitymaps.com/data-portal - Poland - 2022

* Made available here under the Open Database License (ODbL) : https://opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl/1-0/
The power consumption is not equal between each OVHcloud server. It depends on its configuration and on its usage.
OVHcloud is currently deploying Smart PDUs to monitor precisely the electricity consumption of each server.


As all servers do not benefit from this monitoring, a simplified approach has been used in the calculation model. For
each server, OVHcloud has evaluated the associated power consumption with an internal project aiming at providing
for every potential configuration – capacity of the CPU, size of the RAM, etc. – and customer profile the typical power



                                                                        7
consumption expected. The evaluated typical power consumptions are then compared to real measured power
consumptions to validate the models.


Nevertheless, as explained above assessing the net power consumption of the server has to be completed by the rest
of the electricity consumption of the datacenter. To provide the best quality and most useful information to customers,
we consider the proper PUE of each datacenter. This is done considering the overall power consumption of the data
center and distributing extra power consumptions – those that are not from direct server consumptions – over all server
connected in the building. The method allows for a more precise estimation of the power consumption to be allocated
to each OVHcloud server.


                                                  𝑬𝒏𝒆𝒓𝒈𝒚 𝒄𝒐𝒏𝒔𝒖𝒎𝒑𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 𝒐𝒇 𝑫𝒂𝒕𝒂𝒄𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒆𝒓
                                         𝑷𝑼𝑬 =
                                                 𝑬𝒏𝒆𝒓𝒈𝒚 𝒄𝒐𝒏𝒔𝒖𝒎𝒑𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 𝒐𝒇 𝑰𝑻 𝒆𝒒𝒖𝒊𝒑𝒎𝒆𝒏𝒕
                              Equation 1. PUE2 rolling 12-month average with ISO30134 norm



OVHcloud leads an ambitious green energy policy. Once the power consumption has been estimated, the GHG
emissions are calculated on a location-based approach, meaning that the local energy mix is taken into account for
each datacenter (Table 2). Since November 2023, we have been taking into account the GHG emissions corresponding
to our low carbon energy contracts as indicated by the "market-based" emission factors. At this stage, the carbon
footprint of the usage phase of each server completed by other IT materials and infrastructure is assessed and included
in the global results.

                        c. Operations

                    Carbon Balance

As explained above, this nature of emissions gathers every OVHcloud GHG emissions that is not accounted as either
Manufacturing or Electricity. The operations-related carbon footprint is the sum of the impacts of several scopes and
activities including:
    •   Scope1: Direct emissions from
            o    Back-up Power Generators
            o    Diffuse Emissions of HVAC
            o    Internal fleet of combustion engine vehicles
    •   Score 2: Indirect emissions from
            o    Electricity consumed for server manufacturing
    •   Scope 3: Indirect emissions from
            o    Energy and fuel related activities
            o    Freight and Transportation
            o    Building immobilization and capital goods
            o    Business travel
            o    Employee commuting
            o    End of life treatment
            o    Backbone & Network assets

                                                              8
             o   Goods and services purchased for OVHcloud Operations (Water, Employees computers, Internal
                 information system)
The data considered for this nature of emissions comes from the carbon balance of the company2.
The method chosen is a simplified approach using an equal distribution of the Operations impacts over the entirety of
the servers dedicated to customer use.

                    OVHcloud’s internal IT

This raises the question of the allocation of the impacts generating by OVHcloud’s internal IT. It has been decided that
there would be one single methodology for distributing the related GHG emissions, and that this method would be the
same as for the Operations. Indeed, when dealing with corporate IT equipment the impacts must be equally allocated
over all OVHcloud servers.


                                                       Key insight
    The environmental impact of a server dedicated to internal usage is distributed over the servers at a global view.


As for the Operations, OVHcloud Sustainability teams are currently working on a different allocation method that
would more realistically reflect the server resources consumptions. However, for the time being, as the operation part
represents a minor part of the total footprint, the equal distribution will give satisfactory results. As an example,
repartition of the data centers buildings according to the number of servers installed inside seems relevant, while
allocation of the support team’s footprint can be challenged: products can have dedicated teams, according to level
of support for instance.




2
 It follows the GHG Protocol methodology. Greenhouse Gas Protocol provides standards, guidance, tools and training
for business and government to measure and manage climate-warning emissions.
                                                       9
II.       Methods for allocating dedicated server’s carbon footprint

The whole methodology developed by OVHcloud and presented here aims at distributing the entirety of the company’s
GHG emissions over the customer carbon invoices. It is assumed that the whole company activity is dedicated to
delivering the best services to its customers, and therefore all of its impacts must be considering in this reporting
process.


Once the impacts of all the servers have been estimated, it results in a list of machines with associated amount of GHG
emissions divided into three natures of emissions – Manufacturing, Electricity and Operations. To be able to report to
each customer the emissions due to its use of OVHcloud products, the next step is to allocate these emissions over the
OVHcloud’s customers considering the services they have subscribed to and the infrastructure they are based upon.


Within the products whose footprint is detailed in the calculation tool, OVHcloud offers two different types of products:
      •   products that imply dedicated equipment to a customer– for a server, it means that the whole physical
          machine capacity and therefore all virtual machines hosted are dedicated,
      •   products hosted on servers which are mutualized between different customers.


The categorization of OVHCloud’s offers is given in Table 3.
These two kinds of offers must be considered separately in the reporting process as the carbon footprint allocation
rules will vary and require different assumptions. The two approaches are presented here below.


                Table 3: Table of OVHcloud offers with the categorization dedicated vs. mutualized services

                    OVHcloud dedicated products                       OVHcloud mutualized products
                                                                         Public Cloud – Compute
                              Baremetal
                                                                           Public Cloud – Storage
                                                                           Public Cloud – Network
                         Hosted Private Cloud
                                                                                Web Hosting


Regarding the dedicated services, the customers have at their disposal a range of physical machines which can be
operated whenever they want and to the capacity they want. It is then evident that for such services the whole carbon
footprint associated with the dedicated servers must be allocated to the client who holds them. Therefore, every
emission whatever the nature (manufacturing, electricity and operations) would be reported in the carbon report of
the client as presented in Figure 5.




                                                            10
                      Figure 5. Diagram of the calculation approach chosen for dedicated services



Once, the list of servers dedicated to one client has been identified, it is about summing the emissions of each server
related to the three categories (Operations, Manufacturing, Electricity) using the methods presented above. Finally, it
is possible to present to the client a carbon footprint encompassing all 3 scopes of OVHcloud own carbon balance, with
a distribution by data centers and services.


                                                      Key insight
 For dedicated products (e.g., Baremetal, Private Cloud) all emissions associated with the dedicated equipment are
                                               allocated to the customer.




                                                          11
