How Microsoft is
advancing embodied
carbon measurement
at scale for Azure
hardware
By: Kali Frost, Ines Sousa and Leo Aspauza
Contributors: Arash Saboori, Lalit Joshi, Ranganathan
Srikanth, Daniel Berger, Fiodar Kazhamiaka




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware   1
Executive Summary

This white paper introduces Microsoft’s cloud hardware emissions methodology (CHEM), a scalable
approach to measure the embodied carbon of datacenter information and communication (ICT)
hardware. CHEM combines process-based life cycle assessment (pLCA), AI-powered cloud tools,
product granular data and state-of-the-art semiconductor impact data that enable fleet-wide carbon
accounting and actionable insights for supply chain interventions, hardware design, and sustainability
reporting.

What this white paper covers:

  • The challenge of accurately measuring embodied carbon at scale in datacenter hardware and why traditional
    LCA approaches are limited.
  • How CHEM works: integrating Microsoft’s product data systems, automated material and proxy mapping,
    and advanced semiconductor models.
  • Applications across Microsoft’s business: Scope 3 reporting, supply chain interventions, hardware design
    optimization, and carbon roadmapping.
CHEM shifted Microsoft from financial proxies to pLCA, empowering sourcing and design teams with
actionable measurements and ability to cost-effectively prioritize interventions. AI amplified this impact
by automating steps, such as materials to life cycle inventory (LCI) mapping, reducing modeling time,
and enabling LCA practitioners to focus on integrating supplier data and driving actionable insights.

Key benefits of CHEM that are highlighted include:
  • Scalability and automation: CHEM models thousands of hardware configurations efficiently, enabling rapid,
    consistent, and high-resolution carbon footprinting across Microsoft’s cloud fleet.
  • Data quality and modularity: Integration of supplier-specific data and state-of-the-art semiconductor impact
    data improves accuracy, while modular architecture allows for continuous updates as new data becomes
    available.
  • Actionable insights: CHEM enables hot spotting emissions drivers deep within multi-tiered supply chains,
    supporting targeted decarbonization interventions and informed hardware design decisions.
We also emphasize key areas for next-level data-driven actions in the industry, which include invest in
better data, use of AI to improve data exchange and quality, quantify boundaries differences between
LCA methodologies, and collaborate to standardize LCA based carbon accounting for data center ICT
hardware.

CHEM’s impact extends beyond Microsoft. As part of ongoing collaboration with other hyperscalers and
the broader ICT sector to share best practices and align on unified standards, CHEM is being leveraged,
alongside partner methodologies, to develop Product Category Rules (PCRs) and an open methodology
to scale LCA. These efforts, driven through the Open Compute Project (OCP) and SEMI Semiconductor
Climate Consortium (SCC), aim to harmonize carbon accounting practices, improve data quality, and
enable consistent, actionable measurement of embodied carbon emissions that supports global
sustainability goals.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                              2
Contents
Executive Summary ……………………………………..………………………………………………. 2

Introduction ……………………………………………………………………………………….………… 4

Why CHEM? ………………………………………………….……………………………………………… 5

CHEM: Advancing LCA for Cloud .………………………………………………………………… 7

CHEM in Action .…………………………………………………………………………………………… 10

Conclusion and What’s Next ..………………………………………………………………………. 13

References …………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 14

Glossary ………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 15




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware   3
Introduction

Microsoft and other large-scale cloud service providers are targeting significant greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions reductions to align with net zero global goals. To meet these goals, it is critical
to measure and reduce the Scope 3 embodied carbon impact of Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) hardware across datacenters and requires a reliable, granular,
and scalable process for calculating GHG emissions and tracking progress. The datacenter ICT
hardware supply chain is one of the largest contributors to Microsoft’s Scope 3 GHG emissions,
thus actionable measurement of ICT hardware embodied carbon is required to accelerate
decarbonization efforts and meet our 2030 carbon negative goal.

This white paper introduces Microsoft’s cloud hardware emissions methodology (CHEM), a life-
cycle assessment (LCA) based methodology developed to automate and scale the environmental
impact modeling of complex ICT hardware systems in our datacenters. CHEM addresses key
challenges that have hindered the use of LCA for these systems:

Scaling product LCA to a           Rapid technological                 Integration of semiconductor
datacenter fleet                   development                         impact data
LCA provides the granularity       Automation frees up time to         Semiconductor chips are key
required to identify hotspots      focus where it matters –            drivers of datacenter ICT
driving emissions, quantify        CHEM modeling automation            embodied carbon – CHEM’s ability
impact reduction from              enables effort to be applied        to differentiate impact among key
implementing targeted              in improving data quality and       chip technologies (e.g. memory,
interventions, and track           supply chain                        processors) with state-of-the-art
decarbonization progress           representativeness, in an           impact data in product and fleet
towards goals – CHEM               industry where systems are          models can improve decision-
modeling helps us scale these      rapidly evolving and                making for supply chain
insights across our Azure          materials are only increasing       decarbonization and cloud
fleet without compromising         in complexity.                      systems architecture design.
on precision.



We provide insights into CHEM and how it has been applied to Microsoft’s cloud business. We highlight
a range of key applications, including organizational Scope 3 emissions accounting and reporting,
supply chain decarbonization interventions, ICT hardware systems design for sustainability, and carbon
roadmapping. We also emphasize in concluding remarks key areas we believe should be in the spotlight
for next-level data-driven actions in the industry to accelerate the decarbonization of cloud
infrastructure and contribute to global sustainability goals.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                         4
Why CHEM?

Microsoft and other major cloud providers are targeting significant GHG emissions reductions to align
with net zero global sustainability goals [1]. For Microsoft to drive its decarbonization efforts and meet
its carbon negative goals by 2030 [2], it is critical to measure the Scope 3 embodied carbon impact of
ICT hardware across its data centers accurately, actionably, and at scale. Additionally, the embodied
carbon in semiconductor chips represents the main contributor to Microsoft’s datacenter ICT hardware
supply chain emissions. Therefore, integrating state-of-the-art semiconductor environmental impact
data is required to track this rapidly evolving industry.

Assessing Scope 3 embodied emissions for datacenter ICT hardware presents significant challenges but
remains an achievable objective. The complexity and large-scale nature of these technologies—
combined with multi-tiered supply chains, rapid technological advancement, and a globally distributed
supplier network—introduce substantial obstacles to accurate measurement and tracking of embodied
carbon emissions. These challenges are further compounded by limited visibility into supplier
operations, competitive pressures that restrict transparency, and inconsistencies in carbon accounting
methodologies. Multiple strategies must be employed to tackle this massive challenge, including
supplier engagement, systematic data collection and enhancement of data quality, as well as
harmonization of methodologies and industry-wide collaboration [3]. Further, the ability to scale carbon
accounting of complex datacenter ICT hardware systems beyond a few products, while maintaining the
data and model granularity required for implementing and tracking decarbonization interventions, is
necessary to enable actionable carbon impact measurement and tracking.

Life-cycle assessment (LCA) is an established and internationally standardized framework to
systematically quantify the life-cycle environmental impacts of products, processes or services, including
their “cradle-to-gate” embodied carbon [4]. In a top-down approach, economic input-output (EIO)
based LCA that links economic activity to environmental impacts can be applied to directionally and
comprehensively estimate embodied carbon impacts [5]. However, common limitations of EIO LCA,
particularly lack of disaggregated product-specific data and economic-based inventory estimates, make
it difficult to account for rapidly evolving and innovative ICT hardware assets or model specific technical
process-based interventions to quantify impacts of IT hardware system design changes. In contrast,
process-based LCA (pLCA) can help identify product, material, or process-specific hot spots and
measure and track targeted modeled emissions reductions – particularly when high-quality unit-process
engineering inventory and variances are available. This level of data granularity and parameterization
can support programs driving business decarbonization efforts, such as supplier engagement and eco-
design.

Although pLCA is widely regarded as a powerful methodology, it faces limitations [6] that can hinder its
broader application—especially given the fast-paced evolution of technology and the complex supply
chains involved in datacenter ICT hardware manufacturing. Below, we outline some of the key
challenges.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                           5
Reliance on generic models                                          Limited
and secondary data                                                  scalability

Generic life-cycle inventory (LCI) process data provided            Data collection is often conducted manually through
by public or commercially available databases are                   product teardowns to create a representative Bill-of-
heavily used to model impacts. While LCI datasets can               Materials (BOM) for a part, subassembly or assembly.
provide a solid baseline, processes are typically                   And even if a BOM is already well characterized, it
modeled based on industry averages and/or literature                must often manually be entered into the LCA
data. For the ICT sector, in particular, these processes            modeling software. Additionally, one of the most
are often outdated and do not reflect the latest                    time-consuming steps is where the LCA expert needs
technologies or company-specific supply chains.                     to associate each material in the BOM with the most
                                                                    representative materials and manufacturing
Some commercial models provide impacts that are
                                                                    processes in the LCI database. These processes can
aggregated across many materials, manufacturing
                                                                    take up to 100+ hours per server (>90% of effort
processes, or tiers of the supply chain, preventing the
                                                                    based on an estimate of the time taken to map
LCA practitioner from incorporating company-specific
                                                                    materials to LCI processes), which limits the ability to
supply chain data, for either baseline estimation or at
                                                                    scale the use of LCA across hundreds or thousands of
the level of a decarbonization intervention (e.g. carbon
                                                                    unique products, without compromising on
free energy use at a chip manufacturing facility).
                                                                    representativeness.

Datacenters can house several thousands of server and rack configurations (Figure 1). To measure the
embodied carbon within our ICT hardware infrastructure and be able to design and track interventions
over time, we need automated, scalable methodologies that deliver consistent results across materials,
components, subassemblies, assemblies, and server or rack configurations. This comprehensive
approach is essential for ensuring thorough coverage and minimizing modeling time.




                   Figure 1. Generic example to illustrate the complexity and scale of ICT hardware in datacenters




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                                             6
CHEM: Advancing LCA for Cloud

CHEM utilizes an innovative approach for conducting LCA to automate and scale the environmental
impact modeling of complex datacenter hardware systems. It was developed using a combination of
Azure data services, a cloud-based automated LCA software (Makersite) and a proxy mapping tool that
incorporate Artificial Intelligence (AI) and state-of-the-art semiconductor manufacturing LCIs developed
by the imec Sustainable Semiconductor Technologies and Systems (SSTS) program1.


CHEM at a Glance
CHEM incorporates three key innovation areas which may differ from common practice (see Figure 2):
1. Integration of Microsoft’s product data management (PDM) system and
   full materials declaration (FMD) data with the LCA software: Through API
   integration with internally managed systems, we have streamlined the overall
   process of transferring BOM hierarchies and associated material data into the
   LCA modeling environment. These robust internal data management systems
   are managed by dedicated teams that collaborate closely with hardware
   design teams and suppliers to collect and maintain data for thousands of
   components. This integration has not only reduced the effort required to
   enrich LCA models but also decreased the risk of errors and enhanced
   modelers’ ability to update assessments in sync with hardware changes.
2. Automated assignment of a material to the appropriate life-cycle
   inventory (LCI): The LCA software automates the process of associating the
   specific material composition of a part (i.e. FMD) with highly representative
   unit processes available from third-party reviewed LCI databases, including
   ecoinvent [7]. This cuts out a lot of manual effort and, while LCA experts are
   still involved in the process, they can now focus on integrating suppliers’
   primary data, performing data quality analysis, ensuring the model is
   representative, and providing actionable insights for sourcing teams and
   designers. For the semiconductor materials in our high-impact chips, we
   follow a specific, semi-automated process to help collect custom information
   and integrate data from the imec SSTS program.




1
 imec (Interuniversity Microelectronics Center) is an R&D center headquartered in Belgium, which specializes in
creating technology roadmaps for the semiconductor industry. The Sustainable Semiconductor Technology and
Systems (SSTS) program was launched in 2021 to update and improve environmental impact assessment of
semiconductor manufacturing.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                                7
3. Scaling granular LCA data across Azure hardware: To scale to thousands
   of configurations representing the Azure hardware fleet, it requires
   post-processing using Azure data services. Key steps in this process are:
   •   Creation of a CHEM parts database. To speed up processing of our high-
       complexity BOMs, LCAs are completed for each part, which then appear
       repeatedly across rack BOMs within our datacenters.
   •   Tools were built to semi-automate the selection of part proxies, by
       providing a proxy part recommendation to the LCA practitioner. For parts
       where complete materials data is not available, a quality proxy must be
       selected from the parts database. Proxy selection is based on a similarity
       algorithm to identify the likeness between parts based on key part
       characteristics. For example, an SSD may have a few fundamental
       specifications which account for most of its emissions – such as the
       semiconductor technology node, NAND chip storage capacity, and
       manufacturing location. LCA practitioners can then quickly select from
       available quality proxies.
   •   Automated reconstruction of the PDM BOM hierarchy with CHEM
       emissions appended. We automate the process of quantifying the
       emissions of each unique server or rack configuration by using the CHEM
       parts database and re-constructing the server or rack emissions by
       leveraging the BOM structure within our existing PDM system.


LCA practitioners perform data quality checks to ensure that inputs to the LCA software (BOM and FMD)
and subsequent data transformations are accurate and representative.




                                    Figure 2. Generic examples to illustrate CHEM.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                 8
Customizing Chip LCA Models with imec SSTS Data
For Microsoft’s cloud ICT hardware, our LCA models show that semiconductor chips are the single most
important driver of embodied carbon. To reduce the impact of this key hotspot, high quality and
transparent data is needed to support prioritization and decision-making, as well as to ensure accurate
emissions reporting. CHEM incorporates imec.netzero data [8] from the imec SSTS program to assess
the environmental impact of manufacturing current and future logic, DRAM and NAND in high-impact
parts (e.g., CPUs, GPUs, DIMMs and SSDs). These parts constitute ~70-85% of a server’s impact,
depending on the hardware configuration.
The virtual fab models in imec.netzero include detailed process flows enumerated by imec experts with
data collected from imec’s 300 mm fab and associated ecosystem of material and equipment providers.
This state-of-the-art LCI data for semiconductor manufacturing is used to create custom unit process
models that are technology and node specific, for example, a logic processor manufactured using the
7nm process node. We create custom models in Makersite’s product lifecycle intelligence platform by
incorporating the imec.netzero LCI data into existing ecoinvent based LCA models.
We further tailor our LCA models by incorporating product- and supply chain–specific data. This
includes aligning the electricity grid mix with the geographic location of the semiconductor
manufacturing facility and specifying chip-level parameters, such as technology node, die size, and
yield estimates. These enhancements allow us to generate LCAs that more accurately reflect actual ICT
hardware configurations in our datacenters. Additionally, the integration of supplier-provided FMDs for
IC (chip) packaging ensures that the material composition is precisely represented, thereby improving
the fidelity of our data.


CHEM Benefits
CHEM provides key benefits, including:
Enables scalability: It allows parts, assemblies, and configurations across Microsoft’s cloud hardware
fleet to be modeled and managed.
Increases modularity that supports model customization to Microsoft’s cloud ICT hardware
supply chain: The modular architecture of fully disaggregated LCA models, mapped to the BOM and
hardware’s chemical composition, allows us to replace generic component and manufacturing process
data with supplier-specific data as it becomes available, which in turn propagates across the models.
Improves consistency between LCA practitioners in modeling and impact dataset selection:
Automated mapping helps standardize modeling decisions, minimizing inconsistencies and human
error that may arise from individual LCA practitioners, for example, in selecting ecoinvent datasets.
Speeds up the LCA modeling process: With less manual intervention, LCA practitioners, rather than
spending hours manually mapping datasets, can allocate that time to gathering and processing primary
data from suppliers and performing data quality assurance and analysis that support decision making
by sourcing and eco-design teams.
The use of AI in this approach to automate processes is an essential time-saving component, and makes
its implementation, at scale, possible. It enables LCA practitioners to spend more time focused on
communicating insights, identifying key decarbonization efforts, and integrating results into




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                       9
comprehensive roadmapping efforts. However, we want to stress the importance of a human-in-the-
loop for quality assuring model results, and for prioritizing and improving model performance.



CHEM in Action

CHEM has been used in different functional areas of Microsoft’s business. The scalability and process-
level modeling underlying CHEM increased ICT hardware coverage and model resolution across a range
of key applications to Microsoft’s cloud business, including:
  • Organizational Scope 3 emissions accounting and reporting,
  • Supply chain decarbonization interventions,
  • ICT hardware systems design for sustainability, and
  • Actionable carbon roadmapping.


Scope 3 Emissions Reporting
To account for the embodied carbon within our datacenter fleet—information
that is incorporated into Microsoft’s annual sustainability report and other
external disclosures—the application of CHEM has enabled coverage of over 97%
of cloud server racks using highly granular pLCA based data. Additionally, nearly
80% of semiconductor emissions are now quantified using imec.netzero data, a
level of detail and scale that would otherwise require thousands of hours of
manual analysis to achieve.
Supply Chain Interventions
The supply chain of Azure hardware remains one of Microsoft’s key levers for
decarbonization. A prominent use case of product LCA is to identify key
intervention hotspots which can often occur from 1-5 tiers deep within the supply
chain, based on ownership structure and specialization of the supply chain. While
this is nothing new for product LCA, our ability to aggregate this information
across suppliers, parts, assemblies or programs is enhanced by the coverage and
scalability of CHEM. For example (Figure 3), if we can pinpoint the impact of
electricity or direct emissions in a given process, there are opportunities to scale
this quantification, size and advocate for the targeted use of carbon free energy
or manufacturing process interventions that reduce direct emissions, and account
for this in our inventory with high precision.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                  10
Figure 3. Targeting and sizing supply chain interventions with CHEM. In this generic example, we can trace the impact of an electricity hotspot
in the Tier 3 supply chain (“Raw Materials Processing”) by (1) material linkage: identify the quantity of material sourced from the component’s
FMD, (2) LCI association: connect to material’s LCI dataset, and (3) impact scaling: calculate how the impact cascades to the fleet level.




Hardware Systems Architecture Design
Major advances in procurement of carbon free
energy have resulted in more awareness within the
ICT systems architecture community and shifting
from primarily focusing on operational energy
efficiency, to also better understanding the drivers of
embodied emissions [9]. CHEM LCA data has been
used by system architects at Microsoft to quantify the
impact of server design on datacenter's carbon
emissions, providing a reliable way to integrate
carbon metrics in the design of a server, rack, or
cluster [10]. This has also led to an increased
confidence in the magnitude of emissions and the
hotspots that are key from a cloud systems-level
(operational + embodied) design perspective and
contributed to a deeper understanding of the impact
of datacenter design optimizations [11]. Aggregating
emissions at the datacenter fleet level has led to key
insights regarding the impact of storage and memory                               Figure 4. Key contributors to the embodied Scope
(Figure 4), also noted by others in the industry [12].                             3 emissions impact of the Azure fleet hardware.
                                                                                    Memory and storage chips include DRAM and
                                                                                   NAND. Processor chips include those present in
                                                                                            CPUs, GPUs, ASICs, and FPGAs.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                                                          11
Carbon Roadmapping
Supply chain interventions, ICT hardware design optimizations, software efficiency initiatives and other
carbon reduction interventions are compiled to create our Scope 3 carbon reduction roadmap – i.e. the
decarbonization glide path needed for cloud ICT hardware’s contribution towards Microsoft’s scope 3
emissions targets. CHEM is now the methodology underlying the development and update of this
roadmap which reflects and reports interventions at component, rack, and programmatic levels, offering
increased resolution and accuracy in targeting interventions and tracking progress towards our goals.
Importantly, CHEM pivoted us from simplistic financial-based approaches to process-based modeling of
our cloud hardware fleet, which impacted our roadmapping and interventions in two key ways:
  • Enhanced with imec.netzero data, CHEM led to a deepened understanding
    of the impact of memory, which informed our supplier engagement and
    eco-design focus and efforts in decarbonization.
  • This ‘telemetry’ gave us a more precise estimate of where embodied carbon
    impacts reside, allowing more effective return on investment modeling
    associated with our internal carbon fee.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                   12
Conclusion and What’s Next

Enhancing the precision and scale of actionable embodied carbon data for cloud ICT hardware is
essential to achieving our 2030 carbon reduction goals. By improving the granularity and scalability of
carbon footprint assessments—incorporating process-based LCA data throughout every level of the
BOM for nearly all ICT hardware in datacenters—we can more effectively target the hotspots, size and
prioritize decarbonization interventions, drive supply chain action, and support carbon-conscious
product design decisions.
CHEM brings process-level impact modeling resolution, at scale, with an innovative approach and
tooling for conducting LCA that automates and scales carbon impact modeling of complex data center
ICT hardware systems. Developed using a combination of Azure data services, cloud-based LCA
software and a proxy mapping tool that incorporate AI, and imec’s state-of-the-art semiconductor
environmental impact data, CHEM has enabled Microsoft to take a leap in actionable measurement of
carbon emissions for our company. Specific business applications were described in this white paper.
To build on these efforts, there are several key areas we believe should be in the spotlight for next-level
data-driven actions in the industry to accelerate the decarbonization of cloud infrastructure and
contribute to global sustainability goals:
    • Continue investing in high-quality LCI data generation, as the robustness of an LCA depends on
      the underlying data quality. Prioritize improvements based on potential impact – focusing on
      enhancing third-party datasets for Tier2+ processes (e.g., semiconductor-grade chemicals
      production) and incorporating more high-quality primary data from suppliers for identified
      hotspots.
    • Explore the potential of AI and machine learning to enhance data exchange, data quality, and
      further optimize system design for sustainability.
    • Understand and quantify the relative impact and accordingly harmonize and account for
      boundary differences between pLCA, EIO LCA, and organizational carbon footprinting.
    • Standardize carbon footprinting for datacenter ICT hardware. Microsoft is collaborating with
      industry partners through the Open Compute Project (OCP)2 and SEMI SCC3 to develop Product
      Category Rules (PCRs) for datacenter equipment and semiconductors. These efforts aim to
      harmonize LCA-based carbon accounting, enabling consistent and actionable measurement of
      embodied emissions and impact. As part of these ongoing standardization efforts, we are also
      working with other hyperscalers to develop and share with the broader industry a unified
      methodology [13], leveraging each company's best practices for scaling LCA.



2
 OCP (Open Compute Project) is a nonprofit foundation that promotes the open sharing of designs for data
center hardware and infrastructure. Sustainability was introduced as OCP’s fifth tenet in 2022, making it a core
principle alongside openness, efficiency, and scalability.
3
 SEMI SCC (Semiconductor Climate Consortium) is a collaborative industry platform under SEMI (Semiconductor
Equipment and Materials International) for companies across the semiconductor value chain to collectively to
collectively set and address decarbonization of the sector.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                                 13
References
[1] Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi), "Companies Taking Action," Target Dashboard [Online]. Available:
https://sciencebasedtargets.org/target-dashboard
[2] Microsoft, “2025 Environmental Sustainability Report,” May 29, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/corporate-
responsibility/sustainability/report/?msockid=02e4e384d6b668bc29d5f7e8d76f6908
[3] McKinsey & Company, "Making Supply-Chain Decarbonization Happen," June 14, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/operations/our-insights/making-supply-chain-decarbonization-happen
[4] International Organization for Standardization (ISO), “ISO 14040:2006 — Environmental management — Life
cycle assessment — Principles and framework.” [Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/37456.html;
“ISO 14044:2006 — Environmental management — Life cycle assessment — Requirements and guidelines’.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/38498.html
[5] C. T. Hendrickson, L. B. Lave, and H. S. Matthews, Environmental Life Cycle Assessment of Goods and Services:
An Input-Output Approach, 1st ed. New York, NY, USA: Routledge, 2006.
[6] Microsoft, “Microsoft Consumer Devices Life Cycle Assessment Methodology—Executive Summary (v2.1),”
April 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/download/details.aspx?id=55974&msockid=274140e96e1d650a34c356646f1e64c2
[7] R. Frischknecht, N. Jungbluth, H.-J. Althaus, et al., “The ecoinvent Database: Overview and Methodological
Framework,” Int. J. Life Cycle Assessment, vol. 10, pp. 3–9, 2005.
[8] imec, imec.netzero virtual fab. [Online]. Available: https://netzero.imec-int.com
[9] D. Berger, D. Brooks, F. Kazhamiaka, et al., “Reducing Embodied Carbon is Important,” ACM SIGARCH Blog,
Aug. 3, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.sigarch.org/reducing-embodied-carbon-is-important/
[10] J. Wang, D. S. Berger, F. Kazhamiaka, et al., “Designing Cloud Servers for Lower Carbon,” ISCA 2024. [Online].
Available: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/2024-GreenSKU-
ISCA2024.pdf
[11] H. Alissa, T. Nick, A. Raniwala, et al., “Using Life Cycle Assessment to Drive Innovation for Sustainable Cool
Clouds,” Nature, vol. 641, pp. 331–338, Apr. 30, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1038/s41586-025-08832-3
[12] L. Rivalin, L. Yi, M. Diefenbach, et al., “Estimating Embodied Carbon in Data Center Hardware, Down to the
Individual Screws,” Sep. 10, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://sustainability.atmeta.com/blog/2024/09/10/estimating-embodied-carbon-in-data-center-hardware-down-
to-the-individual-screws/
[13] L. Rivalin, S. Weiss-Iijn, A. Saboori, “From Component to Fleet: An Open-Sourced Methodology for IT Carbon
Accounting at Scale,” OCP Global Summit, Oct. 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Ohx4vgneKeVqeTI-zY_Fg7_tMXjvA4pd/view




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                                    14
Glossary
300 mm Fab: Fabs produce chips used in servers and devices and are often described by the size of wafer they
produce. A 300 mm or 12-inch wafer fab produces a 300 mm diameter IC wafer, which is then cut into individual
die (chips).
ASIC (Application-Specific Integrated Circuit): A custom-designed chip for a particular application.
Bill of Materials (BOM): A hierarchical structure of parts, components, and assemblies that make up a hardware
asset such as a rack assembly.
Central processing unit (CPU): One high impact type of component found in server, commonly considered the
“workhorse” of a server.
Cradle-to-Gate: Assessment of a product’s environmental impact from raw material extraction (cradle) to the
point it leaves the manufacturer (gate).
Eco-design: Incorporation of environmental aspects into the product development process, to minimize
environmental impact throughout the product life cycle.
Die area: A quantity property representing the total area of an integrated circuit die.
Dual in-line Memory Module (DIMM): Module that contains one or several random access memory (RAM) chips
on a small circuit board with pins that connect it to the motherboard.
Fleet: In cloud hardware context, it is the collective set of hardware assets (servers, racks, components) deployed
across datacenters
FPGA (Field-Programmable Gate Array): A reconfigurable integrated circuit used for specialized computing
tasks.
Full material disclosure (FMD): A file representing the full material breakdown by mass of a part, originally
intended for compliance purposes.
Graphics Processing Unit (GPU): One high impact type of component found in server, designed to handle tasks
that require high speeds and parallel processing.
Greenhouse Gas (GHG): Gases in the atmosphere absorb radiation, trap heat, causing the greenhouse effect
making the planet warmer. The seven GHGs listed in the Kyoto protocol and the GHG protocol corporate
accounting and reporting standard are: carbon dioxide (CO2), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulfur hexafluoride (SF6),
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3). The most
significant emissions come from human activities from burning fossil fuels for electricity, heat, and transportation.
High Impact Parts (HIPs): Parts that are known to have higher environmental impacts compared to other
components.
Hyperscaler: Large-scale cloud service provider that operates globally distributed datacenters and delivers
computing, storage, and networking resources at scale.
Integrated Circuit (IC): A set of electronic circuits on a single silicon chip.
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA): A standardized approach to quantify the environmental impacts of a product or
service across its life cycle, from raw materials extraction, production, use, end-of life and includes transportation
through all stages.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                                   15
Life Cycle Inventory (LCI): Detailed inventory of manufacturing processes collected during an LCA study that lists
all the inputs of materials and energy and the outputs of products, waste and emissions.
Memory Module (MMOD): A high impact component found in a server that is comprised of a printed circuit
board with large quantities of DRAM (dynamic random-access memory).
NAND Flash Memory: A type of non-volatile storage technology that does not require power to retain data.
Primary Data: Data collected directly from specific processes, suppliers, or operations, typically considered more
accurate and representative.
Product Category Rules (PCR): Set of standardized rules that define how to conduct an LCA for a specific
category of products to ensure consistency and comparability (e.g. system boundaries, functional unit, data quality
and sources, allocation rules). They are aligned with ISO standards (14040/44/67) and developed through multi-
stakeholder consultation to ensure transparency and industry alignment.
Product Teardown: The disassembly of a product and its parts to describe its construction, attributes, and
functionalities.
Rack Assembly: A large cabinet that houses servers or other networking, compute, or storage, and power
handling equipment used in Microsoft datacenters.
Scope 1, Scope 2, Scope 3 GHG Emissions: Scope 1: Direct GHG emissions from owned or controlled sources
(e.g., company vehicles, on-site fuel combustion); Scope 2: Indirect GHG emissions from the generation of
purchased electricity, steam, heating and cooling. Scope 3: All other indirect emissions that occur in a company’s
value chain, including upstream and downstream activities (e.g., supplier manufacturing, product use,
transportation).
Solid State Drive (SSD): A data storage device that reads and writes to non-volatile solid-state memory instead
of rotating magnetic platters for data storage. SSDs have been identified as one of the high impact components
found in a server.
Stock keeping unit (SKU): A retailer’s product number that tracks stock of merchandise. In Microsoft cloud
hardware and this document, a SKU represents a hardware program and often represents the entire BOM, from
the rack assembly (RASSY) level down to the components.
Technology Node: Also referred to as tech node, process node, or simply node, a specific semiconductor
manufacturing process, often described in units of length (nanometers), that refers to half the distance between
identical features. Nodes are known to get smaller over time.
Technology Type: General terms used to segment integrated circuit products. The three main technology types
referred to in this document are Logic, DRAM (dynamic random access memory), and NAND (i.e., flash memory).
Unit Process: In life cycle assessment (ISO 14040): the smallest element considered in the life cycle inventory
analysis for which input and output data are quantified.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware                                 16
This white paper is for informational purposes only. Microsoft makes no
warranties, express or implied, in this document.
Complying with all applicable copyright laws is the responsibility of the
user. Without limiting the rights under copyright, no part of this document
may be reproduced, stored in, or introduced into a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise), or for any purpose, without the
express written permission of Microsoft Corporation.
Microsoft may have patents, patent applications, trademarks, copyrights, or
other intellectual property rights covering subject matter in this document.
Except as expressly provided in any written license agreement from
Microsoft, the furnishing of this document does not give you any license to
these patents, trademarks, copyrights, or other intellectual property.
© 2026 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.




How Microsoft is advancing embodied carbon measurement at scale for Azure hardware   17
