A new approach for Scope 3 emissions
transparency



© 2021 Microsoft. All rights reserved.
Contents
Foreword ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2
Executive summary ......................................................................................................................................................... 3
Introduction....................................................................................................................................................................... 6
    Context ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6
Background .................................................................................................................................................................... 10
    Scope 3 emissions as the next frontier in greenhouse gas management ......................................... 10
    Empowering cloud customers ............................................................................................................................ 14
Research approach ...................................................................................................................................................... 15
    Methodology introduction .................................................................................................................................. 15
    Life cycle phases ...................................................................................................................................................... 16
    Methodology process overview ......................................................................................................................... 17
    Methodology for Microsoft Cloud Scope 3 emissions.............................................................................. 19
        Step 1: Calculate cradle-to-gate and hardware disposition emissions for components and
        hardware................................................................................................................................................................. 19
        Step 2: Calculate datacenter emissions for a given month ................................................................. 20
        Step 3: Calculate Microsoft datacenter region emissions ................................................................... 20
    Methodology for Azure customer allocation................................................................................................ 20
        Step 4: Calculate total customer usage of Azure cloud services ...................................................... 20
        Step 5: Calculate Azure region-specific emission factors .................................................................... 21
        Step 6: Calculate Microsoft 365 regional usage factors per customer ........................................... 21
        Step 7: Calculate total customer-specific emissions .............................................................................. 21
        Step 8: Combine data and summarize ........................................................................................................ 21
Application...................................................................................................................................................................... 22
    Providing climate action insights to our customers ................................................................................... 22
Case study: Bühler........................................................................................................................................................ 28
Appendices ..................................................................................................................................................................... 29
    Key terms and definitions..................................................................................................................................... 29
    Common materials included in IT equipment .............................................................................................. 30




                                                                        A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency                                                           1
Foreword
For over two centuries and into modern times, human ingenuity and the ongoing industrial revolution
have led to great advancements, although with significant negative impact on our world’s climate.
Greenhouse gas emissions due to our industrious achievements have contributed to an increase in the
earth’s temperature, such that an additional increase of 1.5 degrees Celsius could result in catastrophic
outcomes.

Responding to this rapidly unfolding crisis, governments and industries are being called to action. If public
and private sectors can critically examine the underlying causes of climate change, intervene, and
innovate, we will be able to help significantly reduce emissions and waste across industrial supply chains.
In addition, the ability to scale circular economy models can lead to sustainable growth; growth that is
decoupled from our dependency on natural resources.

Microsoft has made a commitment to become carbon negative by 2030, and to remove the impact of all
our historical emissions by 2050. 1 Because of this commitment, we are compelled to focus on Scope 3
emissions, representing one of the largest contributors to greenhouse gas emissions, and attributed in
great measure to processes within our supply chains.

In this regard, Microsoft cloud services and infrastructure represent an area of significant importance, as
cloud services continue to scale globally. Accurate and transparent accounting and actionable reporting of
Scope 3 cloud emissions can be daunting, requiring insights across diverse suppliers, partners, services,
and infrastructure, often representing varying degrees of maturity and adaptability. Such methodologies
must assume an integrated life cycle view of supply chains, across the key areas of planning, design,
sourcing, procurement, manufacture, distribution, usage, and circular approaches to maximizing the useful
life of all infrastructure and materials, to encourage a shift towards sustainable closed loop models.

Building upon and extending the work reported in a 2018 paper from Microsoft, “The Carbon Benefits of
Cloud Computing,” this white paper offers insights into an innovative approach that Microsoft’s cloud
supply chain group is using for the calculation of Scope 3 cloud emissions. Based on these
methodologies, with data derived across our cloud supply chain, and with a view to offering our
customers transparent insights into the emissions impact of their Microsoft Cloud usage. Note that
Microsoft Cloud encompasses all of our Azure services, as well as M365 services, Gaming clouds, and
Dynamics 365. Microsoft Cloud service usage, we present the inclusion of Scope 3 emissions within the
Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard. 2 This calculator enables users to consistently and transparently
view actionable cloud emissions data across relevant impact points in the value chain, across all scopes of
emission.

As sustainability insights become more embedded within value chains, integrated decision-making will
enable significant positive environmental impacts to help stabilize the earth’s climate and restore its

1
  Brad Smith, “Microsoft will be carbon negative by 2030,” Official Microsoft Blog, 16 January 2020,
2
  The Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard was formerly known as the Microsoft Sustainability
Calculator. Microsoft Cloud is exploring new methods for emissions reporting that Microsoft has not yet
adopted in its corporate disclosure. The underlying methodologies and emissions findings generated
from the calculator will differ from those reflected in Microsoft’s corporate disclosure. Future updates to
the methodologies supporting Microsoft’s corporate disclosure will be highlighted accordingly and
published annually.

                                          A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency                 2
natural balance. Microsoft is committed to making and empowering continual progress on this journey
with our customers, partners, and communities.

               Anand Narasimhan
               General Manager of Cloud Supply Chain Sustainability Organization in Azure



Executive summary
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions that occur upstream and downstream of an organization’s
core operations can be extensive, and for many sectors, make up the largest sources of
emissions across the value chain. 3 Due to this significance, these indirect emissions are
becoming more widely understood, and are a primary focus of sustainability and climate
stewardship initiatives.

Microsoft is on a journey to cut its own emissions by more than half by 2030, including our
direct emissions and those of our entire supply and value chain. 4 To achieve this goal, we are
developing tools and processes to track our progress and guide our decision-making. We are
also developing tools to empower our customers to do the same. Through the Microsoft
Emissions Impact Dashboard, we invite our customers to join us on this journey.

As depicted in Figure 1, the value chain encompasses Microsoft Cloud computing services and
includes upstream carbon emissions from suppliers and logistics providers to manufacture and
deliver components and hardware for use in our datacenters. Our own core operational
datacenter greenhouse gases are also emitted during the hardware use phase. After the
hardware’s useful life, downstream carbon emissions are emitted by Microsoft electronic waste
recyclers and IT asset disposition circularity partners.




                              Figure 1: Microsoft Cloud computing value chain




3
  Nicole Labutong, “How can companies address their scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions?,” CDP, 13 July
2018, https://www.cdp.net/en/articles/companies/how-can-companies-address-their-scope-3-
greenhouse-gas-emissions
4
  Brad Smith, “Microsoft will be carbon negative by 2030,” Official Microsoft Blog, 16 January 2020,
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2020/01/16/microsoft-will-be-carbon-negative-by-2030/

                                        A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency             3
Microsoft developed a new methodology to improve its estimation of its own cloud value chain
emissions and allocates those emissions effectively to customers. The process outlined in Figure
2, (1) models component-level GHG emissions, (2) aggregates those emissions to the datacenter
and region levels, and (3) allocates them to customers based on their cloud usage by month and
region. This methodology enables Microsoft to provide customers with their cloud-based
emissions totals based on their specific hardware profiles, datacenters, and reporting month.




                    Figure 2: Microsoft Cloud customer emissions allocation methodology




The Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard is an innovative web-based user interface that allows
our cloud customers to access the Microsoft emissions associated with their cloud usage. The
dashboard allows segmenting customer Scope 3 emissions data by service type (Azure, M365,
etc.), region, and timeframe and provides information on public reporting. The Microsoft
Emissions Impact Dashboard enables Microsoft cloud customers to track their carbon emissions,




                                        A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency    4
carbon intensity scores, and estimated emissions savings compared to certain model on-
premises solutions. 5




              Figure 3: Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard (including the Microsoft 365 Preview)

The virtuous cycle of accurate, transparent scope tracking and reporting holds great potential
for positive change. Realizing that change depends on proactive, collaborative efforts by
companies with a will to lead. This paper is one step along a positive path, which we hope will
spur further, greater steps by our customers and partners.




5
 "The carbon benefits of cloud computing," Microsoft, 2020,
https://download.microsoft.com/download/7/3/9/739BC4AD-A855-436E-961D-
9C95EB51DAF9/Microsoft_Cloud_Carbon_Study_2018.pdf

                                           A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency         5
Introduction
Context
Exponential growth in cloud computing is revolutionizing technology to such a degree that this
era may be regarded as the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR). As described by the World
Economic Forum, 4IR will feature major technological advances in artificial intelligence, robotics,
genomics, materials sciences, 3D printing, and more. Businesses, governments, and civic
institutions will collect, store, and analyze data at an unprecedented scale, speed, and depth.
Cloud computing (large-scale, shared IT infrastructure available over the internet) is the engine
that enables these technology advancements, which in turn drive cloud uptake as businesses
strive to reduce total cost of ownership, realize greater business agility, deliver economies of
scale, and offer ubiquitous data and application access.

This paper builds on the Microsoft report, “The carbon benefits of cloud computing,” and its
2010 report, “Cloud Computing and Sustainability: The Environmental Benefits of Moving to the
Cloud.” This white paper presents a Scope 3 methodology to allow customers to transparently
estimate their procured Microsoft cloud-based datacenter emissions within their value chains. In
the 2018 report, Microsoft detailed a methodology to quantify and compare the energy and
carbon footprint impacts of its cloud services IT applications with on-premises solutions. Among
other key findings, that paper found that although total energy for cloud computing is expected
to increase, cloud computing is significantly more energy- and carbon-efficient than traditional
on-premises datacenter solutions. Microsoft is continuing to take aggressive steps toward
reducing energy usage and has maintained 100 percent renewable electricity (achieved partially
through power purchase agreements and renewable energy certificates) to power its
datacenters. Microsoft is now looking beyond its own direct operational footprint to identify
additional reduction opportunities across our value chain. For this updated study, Microsoft
engaged WSP USA, a global consultancy with expertise in environmental sustainability, to
validate the modeling of customer allocation of the upstream production and downstream
hardware disposition emissions of the Microsoft cloud infrastructure. Note that the underlying
methodologies and emissions findings generated from the calculator will differ from those
reflected in Microsoft’s corporate emissions disclosure. Future updates to the methodologies
supporting Microsoft’s corporate disclosure will be highlighted accordingly and published
annually.

Though the world’s reliance on cloud computing is accelerating, the efficiencies gained by
shifting from traditional on-premises datacenters to cloud operations is expected to keep the
associated energy requirements essentially flat. By most estimates, in 2019, global datacenters
consumed 200 terawatt-hours (TWh) of electricity each year, roughly 0.8 percent of the total
electricity consumed globally. In North America alone, datacenters consume about 79 billion
kilowatt-hours (kWh) of electricity each year—roughly 1.5 percent of the total electricity


                                       A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency          6
consumed in North America. Due to ongoing datacenter efficiency improvements, this number
is expected to remain about the same through 2022 (while at the same time, global internet
traffic and datacenter workload will dramatically increase) for the industry, as noted in Figure 4
following. This number would be higher if not for the material and emissions efficiencies that
many commercial cloud datacenters can offer over on-premises solutions. The ongoing
exponential growth of datacenters makes realizing those efficiencies even more critical.




        Figure 4: Global trends in internet traffic, datacenter workloads, and datacenter energy use, 2010-2022

Increasing demand for computing services is inevitable, and significant cloud growth will likely
continue for the foreseeable future. This situation provides a unique opportunity to make
significant contributions to energy efficiency, and Microsoft has recently announced a company-
wide commitment to become carbon negative by 2030 6—inclusive of its direct emissions and
entire value chain. Microsoft has committed to removing by 2050 all the carbon the company
has emitted (either directly or by electrical consumption) since it was founded in 1975. 7 Many
Microsoft customers are making similar commitments, and Microsoft is committed to helping
and empowering their journeys.




6
  Brad Smith, “Microsoft will be carbon negative by 2030,” Official Microsoft Blog, 16 January 2020,
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2020/01/16/microsoft-will-be-carbon-negative-by-2030/
7
  Brad Smith, “Microsoft will be carbon negative by 2030,” Official Microsoft Blog, 16 January 2020,
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2020/01/16/microsoft-will-be-carbon-negative-by-2030/

                                              A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency                   7
                         Figure 5: The Microsoft pathway to carbon negative by 2030

There has been a growing focus on value chain emissions due to evolving climate science and
the recent formation of influential industry coalitions that promote and support organizational
target setting. The Science Based Targets Initiative (SBTi) is a collaboration between the Carbon
Disclosure Project (CDP), the United Nations Global Compact (UNGC), World Resources Institute
(WRI), the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), and others. SBTi defines and promotes best
practices and calls on companies to set targets aligned with science to limit global warming to
well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and pursue efforts to limit warming to
1.5 degrees Celsius. SBTi criteria require carbon accounting across a company’s value chain.
Microsoft has established a SBTi target and is aiming to help empower cloud service customers
to establish aggressive goals to reduce their carbon footprints.

For Microsoft (and many of its cloud customers), supply chain carbon emissions are much larger
than those from direct operations and more difficult to quantify.8 This represents a significant
and largely unaddressed area of emissions, although a company’s lack of direct control over its
value chain activities can make collecting transparent and accurate supplier data difficult.

The private sector has enormous potential to drive environmental action. With supply chain
emissions 5.5 times greater than operational emissions on average,9 companies that are able
should use their purchasing power and collaborate with their supply chains to create meaningful
impacts. However, a critical component of this collaboration is that to calculate accurate data to
provide to their supply chains, companies must first receive accurate data from their supply
chains. Thus, supplier engagement and access to accurate, transparent, and practical data are


8
  Nicole Labutong, “How can companies address their scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions?,” CDP, 13 July
2018, https://www.cdp.net/en/articles/companies/how-can-companies-address-their-scope-3-
greenhouse-gas-emissions
9
  “Global Supply Chain Report 2019,” CDP, accessed 17 March 2021,
https://www.cdp.net/en/research/global-reports/global-supply-chain-report-2019

                                         A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency         8
necessary but sometimes challenging; without actionable data, organizations often have limited
options for the data management and performance tracking needed to drive reductions.

Nevertheless, every company that is serious about reducing their emissions must include supply
chain emissions in their efforts. When one company calculates its supply chain emissions, it can
initiate a positive feedback cycle: To accurately quantify its supply chain emissions, a company
must collect information from its suppliers. Its suppliers must then calculate their product-
specific operational emissions (which may also encourage them to calculate their supply chain
emissions). As reducing value chain emissions becomes the focus, the aim is that market forces
will reward those who are most successful in doing so. As this process unfolds, carbon emissions
accounting will become more standardized, and companies will have more information to help
make better, longer-term decisions. This is a virtuous cycle that helps improve business, the
earth’s balance, and people’s lives.

The current need for action, combined with the rapidly growing interest in value chain carbon
impacts, offers large companies like Microsoft opportunities to establish supplier synergies and
empower customers. As noted in Microsoft President Brad Smith’s blog post, 10 the Microsoft
Scope 3 reduction commitment will enable our customers to better understand the carbon
impacts of their business with us, discover the potential benefits of fully migrating to the
Microsoft Cloud, and more completely and accurately report their IT service carbon footprints
for the often hard-to-track Scope 3 emissions.




10
  Brad Smith, “Microsoft will be carbon negative by 2030,” Official Microsoft Blog, 16 January 2020,
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2020/01/16/microsoft-will-be-carbon-negative-by-2030/

                                         A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency             9
Background
Scope 3 emissions as the next frontier in greenhouse gas
management
The purpose of this paper is to share the steps Microsoft is taking to measure the carbon
impacts of cloud computing infrastructure across its value chain to promote reductions and
empower cloud customers to take similar action. 11 Microsoft is making the results of this
methodology available for Azure and M365 customers through the Microsoft Emissions Impact
Dashboard which is outlined later in this paper. These value chain emissions include carbon from
both our upstream suppliers and logistics providers and downstream from electronic waste
recyclers and IT asset disposition circularity partners. It is important to note the distinction
between upstream and downstream, and one aim of this paper is to build and expand on
previous efforts to improve energy and carbon efficiency from the direct operation of our
Microsoft cloud datacenters.




                        Figure 6: Product life cycle steps that result in Scope 3 emissions

It can be helpful to discuss emissions in “carbon math” accounting terms—the basic
mathematical concepts that are important for understanding how carbon emissions relate to an
organization’s own footprint and those of its suppliers, customers, and peers. The Greenhouse
Gas (GHG) Protocol12 defines carbon accounting best practices and provides standards,
guidance, tools, and training for businesses and governments to measure and manage carbon




11
   Microsoft Cloud is exploring new methods for emissions reporting that Microsoft has not yet adopted
in its corporate disclosure. The underlying methodologies and emissions findings generated from the
calculator will differ from those reflected in Microsoft’s corporate disclosure. Future updates to the
methodologies supporting Microsoft’s corporate disclosure will be highlighted accordingly and published
annually.
12
   “Greenhouse Gas Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard,” Greenhouse Gas Protocol,
accessed 17 March 2021, https://ghgprotocol.org/corporate-standard


                                           A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency        10
emissions. Per GHG Protocol (GHGP) guidance, carbon emissions are generally classified into
three categories, known as scopes:

   •   Scope 1: emissions that directly result from business activities, such as stationary
       combustion of fuels for backup power generation in cloud datacenters.
   •   Scope 2: emissions that indirectly result from producing energy, such as exhausted from
       an electric power plant.
   •   Scope 3: emissions that indirectly result from all other business activities, such as those
       associated with the upstream raw materials extraction, manufacturing, and delivery of
       cloud-based IT asset infrastructure (such as servers) from suppliers to be used in our
       cloud datacenters. This also includes emissions that occur from our circularity partners
       during the recycling process and disposal for IT hardware reuse.

The following illustration shows the relationship between the scopes within the value chain:




           Figure 7: Examples of Scope 1, 2, and 3 carbon emission types in Microsoft cloud value chain

For many organizations (apart from certain direct-emission heavy sectors such as manufacturing
and energy), their Scope 3 emissions are much larger than their Scope 1 and 2 emissions. This is
because many companies purchase goods and services, such as datacenter hardware
equipment, manufacturing, and disposition services, from suppliers instead of engaging their


                                           A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency              11
own in-house operations (which would create more Scope 1 and 2 emissions). For example,
while a company may not be directly involved in raw material extraction or manufacturing, it
may be indirectly responsible for the resulting GHG emissions because their products or services
result from those emissions. Scope 3 emissions occur both up and downstream in value chains
and result from component and hardware production processes, cloud service datacenter
operation, hardware disposition management, and more. Therefore Scope 3 emissions can be
extensive— value chains account for about 40 percent of global GHG emissions. 13 In 2020, the
entire Microsoft value chain emitted roughly 16 million metric tons of carbon. Of this total,
about 100,000 were Scope 1 emissions, and about 4 million metric tons were Scope 2 location-
based emissions (prior to accounting for the company’s renewable energy purchases). 14 The
remaining 12 million metric tons were Scope 3 emissions.




                        Figure 8: Three examples of GHG emissions by scope and sector

A critical aspect to understanding emissions accounting is that the same emissions that are
Scope 1 or 2 for one organization can be Scope 3 for another. For example, Microsoft cloud
services (as outlined in this paper) result in Scope 1, 2, and 3 emissions for Microsoft, but the
allocated share of these emissions all count as Scope 3 emissions for Microsoft cloud customers
who purchase those services. The following matrix in Figure 9 illustrates these relationships.




13
   Nicole Labutong, “How can companies address their scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions?,” CDP, 13 July
2018, https://www.cdp.net/en/articles/companies/how-can-companies-address-their-scope-3-
greenhouse-gas-emissions
14
   Brad Smith, “Microsoft will be carbon negative by 2030,” Official Microsoft Blog, 16 January 2020,
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2020/01/16/microsoft-will-be-carbon-negative-by-2030/

                                         A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency        12
              Figure 9: Carbon accounting scopes by stakeholder (Microsoft, partners, customers, etc.)

The GHG Protocol offers an example of counting the emissions of electricity generation used for
an electrical appliance: the electricity generator’s Scope 1 emissions are the appliance users’
Scope 2 emissions, which are the appliance manufacturer and appliance retailers’ Scope 3
emissions. 15 As such, each participant in this emissions microcosm has an opportunity to reduce
their emissions share: (1) the electricity generator can use lower-carbon sources for generation,
(2) the appliance manufacturer can increase their product’s efficiency, (3) the appliance retailer
can feature energy-efficient appliances in their store, and (4) the appliance user can use their
appliance more efficiently. When each participant takes their effort seriously, the result of this
multi-focused approach is an overall emissions reduction in this one microcosm that can
combine with others to create powerful, global change.

This inter-relation between carbon scopes, suppliers, and customers puts Microsoft in a unique
position and provides opportunities to unlock efficiencies with our cloud infrastructure suppliers
and circularity providers, empower our cloud customers, and bridge the gaps between each.




15
  “Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Standard,” Greenhouse Gas Protocol, accessed 17 March 2021,
https://ghgprotocol.org/standards/scope-3-standard


                                            A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency            13
Empowering cloud customers
The Scope 3 value chain methodology outlined in this paper will enable Microsoft cloud
customers to better understand their cloud workloads’ carbon impacts, discover the benefits of
fully migrating to Azure and M365, and allow more complete and accurate reporting of carbon
footprints for Scope 3 emissions. Efforts like these are of growing importance due to the
significant number of Microsoft cloud customers that include Scope 3 emissions in their science-
based targets and require easy access to actionable data. The urgency highlighted by recent
climate science, such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Assessment
Report, has made addressing Scope 3 emissions a high priority for many companies that are
serious about reducing their climate impacts.

More and more companies are voluntarily acting to reduce carbon across their entire value
chain and setting targets to align with limiting global carbon to a 1.5-degree Celsius future. As
described above, the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi) helps promote the transition to a
low-carbon economy. Currently, over 1,000 companies are setting science-based emissions
targets based on SBTi criteria, which (among other things) states that if Scope 3 emissions
account for more than 40 percent of a company’s overall emissions, that company must
establish a target to negate that impact.

While managing Scope 1 and 2 emissions can be challenging, doing so for Scope 3 emissions is
much more so because they are more difficult to account for and control. Many Microsoft
customers find measuring and managing Scope 3 emissions difficult due to the challenges of
collecting transparent and accurate data across their many different suppliers, providers, and
customers, and the complexities of current methodologies for obtaining value chain data. The
Emissions Impact Dashboard empowers customers to understand their Scope 3 emissions
resulting from Azure and M365 usage.




                                      A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency        14
Research approach
Methodology introduction
Microsoft Cloud has developed a new methodology (described following), which is third-party
verified, for quantifying the aggregated life cycle carbon impacts of individual IT asset
components across its cloud value chain and allocating them to cloud customers’ specific usage
per Azure service and M365 users. The verified approach has advantages over other approaches,
such as those that use common industry-average, supplier-specific, financial-based modeling;
advanced industry-average service; and supplier-specific service intensity. The methodology will
help advance industry best practices for more accurate estimation of accounting for Scope 3
emissions—as it is cloud-specific materials-based (as opposed to financial-based) and scalable
across multiple services. The methodology is unique because it allows Microsoft to calculate its
total cloud-specific emissions down to specific IT assets while still providing customers with
emissions totals at the service level specific to their use. This provides more actionable Scope 3
data and more ways to reduce emissions over time.

Conventional financial modeling fails to account for procurement changes unless there is a
direct spending change—in fact, under the financial model, spending more to achieve
reductions can increase a company’s apparent emissions. Focusing on materials helps solve
these problems by providing more options and levers for achieving emissions reductions. For
example, by requiring more carbon-efficient materials in products ordered from suppliers,
organizations can more effectively measure, manage, and reduce their Scope 3 footprints.
Results like these have informed Microsoft Cloud Scope 3 methodology.

The chart in Figure 10 compares the benefits of using the Microsoft Emissions Impact
Dashboard with the two most widely used current methods: the financial model and product or
service-level life cycle evaluation. The Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard solves scalability
and geographic specificity challenges and performs in near-real time. The current iteration of
the calculator is a strong starting point that will further evolve to include the latest life cycle
evaluation methods.




                                       A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency        15
The benefits in this figure were measured using specific scenarios for the Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard. Results
may vary depending on the design or configuration of these methods.

                                       Figure 10: Scope 3 customer empowerment


Life cycle phases
To properly evaluate the life cycle impact of Microsoft datacenters, it is important to understand
their value chain locations and specific boundary constraints for the life cycle stages that are
evaluated in this approach. Because Microsoft operates datacenters using various types and
quantities of IT hardware equipment (such as servers and racks), Microsoft must evaluate
upstream supply chain hardware impacts prior to their use in Microsoft business operations.
Because they are the first upstream point that this methodology captures, raw materials (such as
plastics and metals) must first be extracted or reclaimed from old parts to manufacture new IT
components such as disk drives and computer chips. After the materials extraction and
manufacturing phase, the IT components are assembled into various IT hardware components
(such as servers). After assembly, the finished products must be transported via multiple
transportation modes (such as road, ocean, and air) for delivery to a Microsoft datacenter dock.
Once unpacked, the equipment is used in Microsoft datacenter operations over their useful
lifetime and then replaced by newer, potentially more energy-efficient equipment. Finally,
during the downstream value chain hardware disposition phase, the equipment is recycled and
reclaimed for reuse or re-assembly into newer parts, and the cycle begins again. When



                                               A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency                     16
necessary, certain items may be securely disposed of. As outlined in Figure 11, the full value
chain contributes to this cycle’s energy use and greenhouse gas outputs.




                     Figure 11: Value chain contributions to energy use and GHG outputs

The energy consumption and emissions for the life cycle phases described previously include:

   •   Raw material extraction and manufacturing: using raw materials and assembling
       servers, networking equipment, and hard drives.
   •   Transportation: transporting IT equipment from the manufacturer to Microsoft
       datacenters. This will be included in future calculations, but at time of this paper’s
       publication, transportation in supply chain information is limited.
   •   Usage: using electricity to run the servers, networking equipment, hard drives, and
       datacenter infrastructure (such as lighting, cooling, and power conditioning). Where
       relevant, usage also includes energy from internet data flows.
   •   Hardware disposition: recycling and reclaiming for reuse based on conservative
       assumptions about recycling rates.

Microsoft will refresh this model over time primarily through additional life cycle assessments
and evaluations from manufacturing of hardware components and continual improvement of
transportation models.


Methodology process overview
Microsoft Azure and M365 now quantify carbon emissions in their cloud services based on
aggregated IT hardware emissions and allocates them equitably to customers based on their
actual usage. Microsoft customer-specific data outputs from this methodology will be available
to all Microsoft cloud customers via a web tool called the Microsoft Emissions Impact
Dashboard, where the outputs can be tracked, managed, and exported to help advance a variety
of powerful carbon reduction efforts.

The flow chart in Figure 12 depicts the seven-step process included in the Microsoft Cloud
Scope 3 methodology. These two methodologies further consolidate the seven steps:




                                         A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency       17
•   Methodology for Microsoft Cloud Scope 3 emissions: quantifying scope 3 cloud
    emissions at the individual component and IT hardware level.
•   Methodology for Microsoft Cloud customer allocation: connecting emissions to
    organizationally allocated cloud customer emissions based on service-level usage.




                       Figure 12: Scope 3 emissions allocation methodology




                                   A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency    18
Methodology for Microsoft Cloud Scope 3 emissions
Step 1: Calculate cradle-to-gate and hardware disposition emissions for
components and hardware




                            Figure 13: Common components in infrastructure

Microsoft previously developed and had verified an internal methodology, Material Circularity
and Life Cycle Carbon Emission Calculator v7.3, to calculate component-level life cycle GHG
emissions impacts of IT components such as those shown in Figure 13. Using emission factor
outputs for components from this methodology, we can calculate GHG emissions by
aggregating component-level emissions contained within assembled IT hardware parts. Based
on the hardware characteristics in our portfolio, we then combine these component-level
emissions values to determine hardware-level emissions.

To quantify emissions, the process applies independently verified cradle-to-gate and hardware
component-level life cycle evaluation emission factors to specific Microsoft datacenter hardware
components that comprise common hardware types. Upstream cradle-to-gate emissions
captured in these emissions factors include life cycle stages for component-level manufacturing,
warehousing, and transportation to the Microsoft datacenter dock. Downstream hardware

                                      A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency     19
disposition emissions factors used for this analysis include hardware disposition, treatment, and
disposal-transport factors for each hardware component.

Step 2: Calculate datacenter emissions for a given month
To calculate total Microsoft Cloud Scope 3 hardware emissions for a given datacenter, Microsoft
aggregates the hardware-level life cycle emissions from Step 1 with hardware procurement
databases for datacenter hardware. The approach uses material compositions to quantify
individual component emissions across Microsoft datacenters and calculates GHG emissions
from materials used in a piece of IT equipment over an assumed lifetime of six years—if the
equipment’s actual life extends beyond that, its Scope 3 emissions for the extended time will be
zero. If its actual life is shorter, the emissions will continue to be counted for the six-year
estimate to ensure comprehensive accounting. This assumption is based on the average lifespan
of cloud infrastructure materials within Microsoft datacenters.

After calculating all component and hardware-level emissions relevant to a given datacenter,
Microsoft can determine the total emissions for a specific datacenter over a given time period
using emissions aggregation.

Step 3: Calculate Microsoft datacenter region emissions
Because Microsoft operates its datacenters with a regional model, this methodology aggregates
emissions from individual datacenters using datacenter regional mapping.

Methodology for Azure customer allocation
Microsoft allocates IT hardware-based Azure cloud service emissions to individual cloud-based
customers based on their Azure service usage. As outlined in the four steps following, Microsoft
Cloud has developed a bottom-up approach for quantifying datacenter-specific emissions based
on specific hardware types and then allocating the aggregate emissions to the individual
customer level. This allocation approach and implementation through the Microsoft Emissions
Impact Dashboard were independently verified to ensure consistency with the GHG Protocol.

Step 4: Calculate total customer usage of Azure cloud services
To allocate Microsoft Scope 3 hardware emissions to Azure customers, Microsoft defines usage
as the normalized cost metric associated with infrastructure as a service (IaaS), platform as
service (PaaS) or software as service (SaaS). The process uses metric units because it is a usage
measurement applied to all customers and is normalized to exclude discounts and other
variables—the process attributes the total usage to Microsoft customers over specific time
periods. Note that total Azure customer usage includes both direct customer use and a
proportionate amount of overhead server capacity dedicated for delivering Microsoft cloud
services.



                                      A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency        20
Step 5: Calculate Azure region-specific emission factors
Through a combination of total Azure datacenter region emissions in proportion to total Azure
customer usage, we identify an Azure-specific emissions intensity factor for each Azure metric.
Specifically, we divide the total Azure region emissions by total customer usage within that
region. The result is a Microsoft region-specific emission factor per unit of customer usage for
any given time period.

Step 6: Calculate Microsoft 365 regional usage factors per customer
In this step we calculate a Microsoft 365 ‘regional usage factor’ for each customer in each
datacenter region based on the portion of total Microsoft 365 server resource usage that they
are responsible for within each region. Microsoft 365 server resource usage is driven by both
compute (e.g. active usage of features like Microsoft Teams) and storage (e.g. Exchange Online
mailbox data). In general, the more active users and terabytes of data a customer has in a given
region relative to other customers, the higher their regional usage factor will be.

Step 7: Calculate total customer-specific emissions
This step quantifies customer-specific emissions for Azure services and regions based on
customer-specific normalized cost metrics for usage related to Microsoft supplier-specific
intensity factors. To quantify customer-specific emissions, we multiply a customer’s individual
and measured Azure usage by the Azure region-specific emissions factors in Step 5.

Step 8: Combine data and summarize
In this step, Microsoft cloud customers can use the Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard
outlined later to create different aggregated views of emissions relevant to specific Azure
services, regions, datacenters, and time boundaries.

The Scope 3 GHG emissions quantification and customer allocation methodology just described
offers Microsoft and its cloud service customers an opportunity to consistently and transparently
track their Microsoft Cloud computing global impact further along their value chains. It also
offers opportunities to identify strategies to manage and reduce Scope 3 GHG emissions over
time, which will benefit and empower Microsoft, its customers, and their entire value chains.




                                      A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency           21
Application
Providing climate action insights to our customers
Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard
The Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard is an innovative web-based user
interface that allows Microsoft and its cloud customers to consistently and
transparently track and manage their Microsoft Cloud service usage across all
impact points in their value chains. Because suppliers, customers, investors, and
regulators increasingly demand accurate Scope 3 emissions data for decision-
making, a transparent, consistent, and easily accessible estimate is critical for public and external
reporting. The calculator will also be useful for Microsoft customers that need actionable Scope
3 emissions data to support performance tracking for organizational targets and commitments.
Because the application reflects our Microsoft Cloud supply chain and Scope 1, 2, and 3
emissions, customers can gain a more comprehensive view of their cloud related Scope 3
emissions. This offers opportunities for both Microsoft and our cloud customers to collaborate
and help unlock mutually beneficial synergies.




                                       A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency         22
Some information relates to pre-released product which may be substantially modified before it’s commercially
released. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.




                                  Figure 14: Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard




                                             A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency                  23
Figure 15: Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard emissions details




                   A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency   24
Figure 16: Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard emissions savings




                   A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency   25
                     Figure 17: Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard preparation report

As the previous screenshots show, the Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard displays Azure
and Microsoft 365 customer Scope 3 cloud emissions data as charts, absolute values, intensity
values, percentages, and geographical location. The dashboard offers the ability to segment
customer Scope 3 emissions data by cloud service type, region, and timeframe and offers
information on public reporting and Microsoft global renewable energy project initiatives.
Future updates will allow segmentation to the instance level, which can unlock further insights
for customers.




                                         A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency    26
The Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard allows for a broader, more inclusive spectrum of
data points that enable a more accurate assessment of the energy and carbon implications of
common services used today.

By using the Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard, cloud customers can track their carbon
emissions, carbon intensity scores, and emissions savings over on-premises solutions.




                                    A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency       27
Case study: Bühler
This case study was developed prior to the November 2020 public preview of the Microsoft
Emissions Impact Dashboard. For more recent case studies, please visit
Microsoft.com/sustainability.

The Bühler Group is a leading developer of grains and food solutions,
consumer foods, and advanced materials that contribute to the production
of energy-efficient vehicles and buildings. Every day, around two billion
people enjoy food produced on Bühler equipment, and one billion people
travel in vehicles that include parts made with Bühler machinery.

Bühler has ambitious targets to become carbon neutral by 2030 and drive change across its
customers’ entire value chains—only a cross-value chain approach will generate global scale
impact. Scope 1 and 2 emissions are easier to track because the activities that produce them are
internal. Scope 3 emissions are more challenging because supplier data is required. Bühler is
extremely grateful to their supply base for providing the required data, but compiling that data
can be a time-consuming and error-prone manual process. Using the Microsoft Emissions
Impact Dashboard makes it possible to capture the right data in the right format at the right
time and visualize that data in an intuitive format that facilitates actionable conclusions that
drive real change.

Bühler and Microsoft have ongoing collaborations in several areas and share a vision for
optimizing the sustainability of their respective business operations. When Microsoft began
early development of the calculator, Bühler was a natural partner for live testing.

Bühler extensively used all features and processes of the Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard
to determine the Scope 3 emissions associated with Microsoft Cloud. Bühler users describe the
calculator as easy to use, with an intuitive dashboard that allows the quick generation of
credible and useful data—including where their carbon footprint was highest. They found the
inputs and processes that generate the results to be easy to understand and transparent. Bühler
Sustainability Specialist Katharina Hilker says, "Having good quality data versus relying on rough
estimation in Scope 3 was very helpful to our reporting process." The Microsoft Emissions
Impact Dashboard will become even more important to Bühler as they further incorporate
Scope 3 data into decision-making.

Microsoft and Bühler are continuing their calculator collaboration. With Bühler’s valuable input,
Microsoft will continue to advance the Microsoft Emissions Impact Dashboard to make it more
powerful and useful in helping all companies achieve their sustainability goals.

Bühler’s Digital Officer Stuart Bashford says, "If all big companies in the world worked like this,
we’d actually have a chance to make a difference."


                                       A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency          28
Appendices
Key terms and definitions
Microsoft Cloud: The Microsoft Cloud encompasses Azure, Microsoft Power Platform, Dynamics
365, Microsoft 365 and Teams, LinkedIn, GitHub, and Microsoft Security, all running on shared
datacenter fabrics. (https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-cloud)

Amortization: a process by which a product’s total emissions are accounted for over the course
of its lifetime as opposed to at the specific time of emission. Amortization simplifies the
emissions accounting process and more accurately reflects a product’s emissions impact.

Cradle-to-gate: the period of a product’s life from resource extraction (cradle) to the factory
gate (that is, before it is transported to the consumer). 16

Cradle-to-grave: the period of a product’s life from resource extraction (cradle) to its
disposition (after which it is recycled or disposed of).

GHG Protocol: an organization that establishes comprehensive global standardized frameworks
to measure and manage greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from private and public sector
operations, value chains, and mitigation actions.

Hardware disposition: recycling and reclaiming for reuse.

Life cycle evaluation: a methodology for determining the environmental impacts of a
commercial product, process, or service throughout its life. Life cycle evaluations span from raw
material extraction and processing to final disposal and cessation of activity. The span is often
referred to as cradle-to-grave.

Material circularity: the degree to which the materials used in a product can be reused,
repaired, refurbished, or recycled. Complete circularity means that whatever waste a product or
process produces will become inputs for another product or process.

Scope 1 emissions: direct emissions that your activities create.

Scope 2 emissions: indirect emissions that result from the production of the electricity or heat
you use.




16
  “Product Life Cycle Accounting and Reporting Standard,” Greenhouse Gas Protocol, September 2011,
https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/Product-Life-Cycle-Accounting-Reporting-
Standard_041613.pdf


                                       A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency          29
Scope 3 emissions: indirect emissions from all other activities in which you are engaged. For a
business, these Scope 3 emissions can be extensive and must be accounted for across its supply
chain, materials in its buildings, employee business travel, and the life cycle of its products
(including the electricity customers consume when using the products). A company’s Scope 3
emissions are often far larger than its Scope 1 and 2 emissions combined.

Supply chain: the full sequence of individuals or companies involved in the creation and sale of
a product or service.

Usage: using electricity to run servers, networking equipment, hard drives, and datacenter
infrastructure (such as lighting, cooling, and power conditioning). Where relevant, usage also
includes energy from internet data flows.

Value chain: the full sequence of individuals or companies involved in adding value to a
product or service.


Common materials included in IT equipment
These IT components are comprised of thousands of materials, in varying quantities—emissions
calculation focuses on the 22 most common. These materials typically make up 90-95 percent of
the IT equipment composition:




                              Figure 18: Common materials in IT equipment


                                       A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency         30
_____________________________________

DISCLAIMERS

(c) 2021 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

This document is for informational purposes only and it is provided “as-is.” MICROSOFT MAKES NO WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, WITH RESPECT TO THE INFORMATION IN THIS DOCUMENT.

Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without
notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or
inferred. In addition, some information relates to pre-released product which may be substantially modified before it is commercially
released.

This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and
use this document solely for your internal, reference purposes.




                                                       A new approach for Scope 3 emissions transparency                        31
